Galley fire alarm during diving operations Safety Flash Published on 10 September 2026 Generated on 16 September 2026 IMCA SF 16/26 3 minute read Jump to: What happened? What went right? What was the cause? Lessons and actions Related Safety Flashes There was a galley fire alarm during active surface-supplied diving operations. What happened? There was a galley fire alarm during active surface-supplied diving operations on a dive support boat working in shallow water (2.4m depth). There was one diver in the water. Diving was immediately stopped, and the diver was safely recovered to the Launch and Recovery System (LARS) before the dive team responded to the vessel alarm. The alarm was quickly confirmed to be a false/nuisance alarm caused by cooking by-products. There were no injuries or equipment damage, but the event highlighted the risks of uncoordinated Simultaneous Operations (SIMOPS) between vessel domestic activities and diving operations. What went right? Detection — the fire alarm sounded, indicating a possible fire in the galley area of the vessel;. Notification — the Dive Supervisor was alerted to a potential vessel emergency occurring during an active dive. Diver protection — diving operations were stopped without delay and the diver recovered safely to the LARS. Vessel response — the vessel master and crew responded to the alarm correctly and rapidly. Stand-down and resumption — once the situation was confirmed safe and the cause of the alarm understood, normal diving operations were able to continue.&nbsp; What was the cause? The immediate cause was judged to be the galley fire detector was triggered by a non-fire stimulus (probable cooking smoke / steam / heat) during a meal preparation period which coincided with an active dive. Contributing causes were Cooking in the galley at the same time as an active surface-supplied dive — A SIMOPS condition not formally managed. Detector sensitivity / siting in the galley not optimised to discriminate between cooking by-products and genuine fire conditions. Absence of a specific brief, in the toolbox talk, on how the dive team and crew should react to a vessel alarm occurring during a dive (although the actual response was nonetheless correct). Root causes Safety Management System (SMS) / planning gap — the project Hazard Identification and Risk Assessment (HIRA) and the bridging document did not identify support-vessel nuisance alarms as a credible event capable of interrupting diving operations. SIMOPS management gap — the coordination of routine vessel activities (galley operation) with diving windows was not addressed in the project SIMOPS review.&nbsp; Our member notes that though the planning did not anticipate this event, the emergency response itself was correct and effective: the diver was protected, the alarm was investigated, and operations resumed only once the situation was confirmed safe. Lessons and actions Our member Updated their HIRA, SIMOPS plan, toolbox talk and procedures. Added an appropriate drill scenario “vessel alarm during a dive” for future practice. Made a careful review of galley fire detector type, sensitivity and siting, including possible alternative fire detection solutions to reduce nuisance activations. Related Safety Flashes Near miss: Fire of electrical distribution board during diving operations Safety Flash IMCA SF 10/19 13 May 2019 Read more Be alarmed by all alarms Safety Flash IMCA SF 32/16 29 November 2016 Read more Download PDF Safety Flashes Latest Safety Flashes: Shoulder injury during intrusive work on pressurised hydraulic system A hydraulic technician sustained a left shoulder injury during maintenance on a known small leak on a main hydraulic pressure line. Read more Galley fire alarm during diving operations There was a galley fire alarm during active surface-supplied diving operations. Read more Unauthorised firing of rocket line Without warning or agreement, Line Throwing Apparatus (LTA) was discharged by the tanker deck crew, splitting into two parts. Read more Unauthorized modification of main engine fuel pump linkage An unsafe and unauthorized modification was identified on the main engine high-pressure fuel pump linkage arrangement. Read more Mooring rope caught in stern thruster Confusion whilst unmooring as it was being prepared for departure from port, led to mooring ropes being caught in the stern thruster. Read more More Safety from IMCA IMCA Safety Flashes summarise key safety matters and incidents, allowing lessons to be more easily learnt for the benefit of the entire offshore industry. The effectiveness of the IMCA Safety Flash system depends on the industry sharing information and so avoiding repeat incidents. Incidents are classified according to IOGP's Life Saving Rules. All information is anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate, and warnings for graphic content included where possible. IMCA makes every effort to ensure both the accuracy and reliability of the information shared, but is not be liable for any guidance and/or recommendation and/or statement herein contained. The information contained in this document does not fulfil or replace any individual's or Member's legal, regulatory or other duties or obligations in respect of their operations. Individuals and Members remain solely responsible for the safe, lawful and proper conduct of their operations. Share your safety incidents with IMCA online . Sign-up to receive Safety Flashes straight to your email .