Watertight doors left open Safety Flash Published on 6 July 2026 Generated on 16 September 2026 IMCA SF 12/26 2 minute read Jump to: What happened? Why did it happen? Related Safety Flashes Watertight doors in the Engine Room and fire doors in the accommodation were observed open on several occasions during a management audit. What happened? These are critical safety barriers; keeping them open increases the risk of flooding and fire/smoke spread, endangering vessel integrity and crew safety. All watertight and fire doors should be kept closed at all times, except for immediate access, and closed immediately after use. This is in fact a requirement of SOLAS Chapter II-1, Regulation 22, “watertight doors shall be kept closed during navigation”. In addition, SOLAS Chapter II-2 requires fire doors to be self-closing and kept closed unless fitted with approved automatic closing devices. Why did it happen? Complacency in routine: Doors were left open following routine engine room rounds or passage to/from accommodation, with repeated opening and closing of the door perceived as unnecessary. Lack of awareness: Some crew were not fully aware of SOLAS requirements or indeed of their own company safety management system requirements, nor even of the critical importance of keeping watertight and fire doors closed during navigation. Environmental conditions: High temperatures in the Engine Room, accommodation and externally may have led crew to leave watertight and fire doors open to improve ventilation.&nbsp; Here, difficult environmental conditions made it easy for crew to do things in an unsafe way. How can we make it easy to do things safely? Related Safety Flashes Watertight door and emergency hatch found open at sea Safety Flash IMCA SF 20/25 7 November 2025 Read more A reminder on watertight doors Safety Flash IMCA SF 08/24 16 April 2024 Read more Inadequate maintenance and securing arrangements of emergency exit hatches Safety Flash IMCA SF 21/18 17 September 2018 Read more IOGP Life Saving Rules: Bypassing safety controls What are these? View tooltip Download PDF Safety Flashes Latest Safety Flashes: Shoulder injury during intrusive work on pressurised hydraulic system A hydraulic technician sustained a left shoulder injury during maintenance on a known small leak on a main hydraulic pressure line. Read more Galley fire alarm during diving operations There was a galley fire alarm during active surface-supplied diving operations. Read more Unauthorised firing of rocket line Without warning or agreement, Line Throwing Apparatus (LTA) was discharged by the tanker deck crew, splitting into two parts. Read more Unauthorized modification of main engine fuel pump linkage An unsafe and unauthorized modification was identified on the main engine high-pressure fuel pump linkage arrangement. Read more Mooring rope caught in stern thruster Confusion whilst unmooring as it was being prepared for departure from port, led to mooring ropes being caught in the stern thruster. Read more More Safety from IMCA IMCA Safety Flashes summarise key safety matters and incidents, allowing lessons to be more easily learnt for the benefit of the entire offshore industry. The effectiveness of the IMCA Safety Flash system depends on the industry sharing information and so avoiding repeat incidents. Incidents are classified according to IOGP's Life Saving Rules. All information is anonymised or sanitised, as appropriate, and warnings for graphic content included where possible. IMCA makes every effort to ensure both the accuracy and reliability of the information shared, but is not be liable for any guidance and/or recommendation and/or statement herein contained. The information contained in this document does not fulfil or replace any individual's or Member's legal, regulatory or other duties or obligations in respect of their operations. Individuals and Members remain solely responsible for the safe, lawful and proper conduct of their operations. Share your safety incidents with IMCA online . Sign-up to receive Safety Flashes straight to your email .