

Contact: bseepublicaffairs@bsee.gov 
Phone: (800) 200-4853 
Crane Anti-Two Block Weight Pulled into Boom Tip 
Causing Damages to Auxiliary Cable and Sheave 
         
              
                        
                                       
                                       
On Dec.
 
31, 2021, while lifting a 4,500-pound tote tank from a boat, a platform crane operator 
observed the crane’s Anti-two Block (A2B) weight fall on top of the auxiliary line ball after the 
A2B system alarmed and was subsequently bypassed. With the A2B system still in bypass, the 
platform crane operator positioned the crane boom over the helideck where it could be 
inspected. A certified crane mechanic determined the cable holding the A2B weight and the 
eyelet on the wireless A2B sensor was broken. A spare wireless A2B sensor was found at 
another facility and installed that same day to get the crane back in service. 
While the crane was being used later the same day, the crane operator watched the A2B weight 
fall again and the A2B system alarmed. Once again, the crane operator placed the A2B system 
Safety Alert No. 433 
March 16, 2022 
SAFETY ALERT 
Damaged auxiliary line on drum 
Damaged auxiliary line boom tip sheave 
Auxiliary line protruding wire and A2B sensor 
weight 
Damaged auxiliary line 

Picture of cable installation 
Illustration of chain installation 
in bypass, hoisted the auxiliary line up without a load attached, and placed the crane boom over 
the heliport for another inspection by the crane mechanic. It was discovered that the A2B weight 
was carried into the boom tip and damaged the sheave and auxiliary cable. The crane was 
subsequently placed out of service. 
An investigation by the Operator concluded a protruding broken strand carried the A2B weight 
on the auxiliary cable and into the boom tip sheave. The Operator reported the A2B alarm was 
bypassed during both lifting incidents. 
Almost a year prior, on a nearby facility managed by the same Operator, a platform crane was 
being used to lift a toolbox weighing approximately 3,400 pounds, at which time the 10.6-pound 
wireless A2B sensor for the auxiliary line fell off the crane boom. The A2B weight slid down the 
auxiliary line cable and landed on the ball. The 14-inch section of chain that supports the A2B 
weight from the wireless A2B sensor fell and struck the level safety high switch on a separator 
that tripped and shut down the facility. 
As a corrective action to this incident, the Operator removed chains and installed retention 
cables from the wireless A2B sensor to the weight. This change was also implemented on other 
platform cranes where chains were installed. The annual crane inspection conducted several 
months before the Dec. 31, 2021, incident revealed the A2B system worked but after the chains 
were removed and cables installed, the wireless A2B sensor would trip when mostly loading and 
unloading boats. This finding was noted as a recommendation instead of deficiency and was not 
corrected prior to the incident. 
             
                                                                       
An Anti-two Block (as defined by API SPEC 2C 6
th
 Edition) protects hoist ropes, structural 
components and machinery from damage that may occur when two sheave groups such as the 
load block and boom tip, come into contact as the hoist cable is drawn in. 
The recent incidents are still under investigation by BSEE District Personnel. 

Although this incident is still under investigation, BSEE recommends that 
operators and contractors consider the following: 
· Listing malfunctioning safety devices as an unsafe condition on inspection reports. 
· Conducting a thorough crane inspection of all components before bypassing any crane 
safety system due to an alarm. 
· Carefully monitoring all components when safety devices are in bypass for inspection, 
testing and maintenance. 
· Taking the crane out of service, or restrict its operations, to eliminate an unsafe condition 
if deficiencies are known. 
· Consulting and following manufacturer recommendations prior to changing or replacing 
crane components that differ from the original design. 
· Ensuring a Management of Change (MOC) (i.e., 30 CFR 250.1912) is conducted and the 
impacts to operability are understood and mitigated when changing components on the 
crane and other material-handling equipment. 
· Ensuring the crane, its boom, and other components are inspected visually before each 
use. Methods include but are not limited to physical inspections, binoculars, cameras etc., 
in addition to annual crane inspections. 
· Ensuring compliance with the requirements listed in 30 CFR 250.108 - cranes and other 
material-handling equipment. 
· Ensuring during lifting operations that safety devices and systems on cranes and other 
material-handling equipment are not intentionally bypassed or overridden without 
appropriate authorization, communication, and oversight. 
· Promoting the topic of crane safety during Health, Safety and Environment (HSE) 
meetings. 
· Updating the crane manuals, and procedures to reflect the use of cables instead of 
chains. Adjust inspection and maintenance procedures if appropriate to account for the 
use of cables. 
· Training personnel in crane risk assessments and change management or offer 
refresher courses on the topic; and 
· Reviewing Safety Alert 332 for recommendations regarding crane hazards identified by 
BSEE in Risk Based Inspections. 
A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of 
the circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains 
recommendations that could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer 
Continental Shelf. 
Category: Crane/Lifting 