

 
SAFETY ALERT 
Contact: bseepublicaffairs@bsee.gov 
Phone: (800) 200-4853 
  
Post-Incident Images of Nitrogen Cylinder Rack and Debris. 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
BSEE Investigates Nitrogen Cylinder Rupture Causing Worker 
Injuries and Equipment Damage; Issues Recommendations to 
Enhance Safety and Prevent Future Incidents 
 
 
The Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement (BSEE) recently investigated the 
rupture of an improperly inspected nitrogen cylinder that led to multiple injuries and 
equipment damage. At the time of the incident, rig personnel had positioned a rack with 
12 nitrogen cylinders to begin pre-charging the accumulator system cylinders with 
nitrogen. One of the nitrogen cylinders   within the rack subsequently ruptured at its base, 
resulting in the dispersion of both the nitrogen cylinders and debris that was within the 
rack, as well as of the remaining cylinders situated in the immediate and port aft areas 
of the rig. Three rig personnel sustained minor injuries from shrapnel.  
  
  
 
Safety Alert No. 494 
January 24, 2025 

 
 
The failure of the nitrogen cylinder, which is attributed to corrosive wall loss exacerbated 
by environmental factors and structural conditions, highlights critical vulnerabilities in the 
storage and maintenance of nitrogen cylinders, particularly in marine environments. The 
presence of crevices at the base of the cylinders, combined with moisture accumulation, 
significantly accelerated the corrosion process, leading to the hazardous failure. Heavy 
deterioration of the galvanic coating on the storage rack further compounded the failure, 
indicating systemic neglect of maintenance protocols that could prevent such incidents. 
BSEE recommends that operators and their contractors, where appropriate, do 
the following:  
• Ensure that all cylinders are properly labeled and marked with the appropriate 
United States Department of Transportation (DOT) identification number.  
• Verify that all cylinders are within their recertification period and have been 
properly recertified.  
• Ensure that all cylinders are filled to the appropriate pressure and the filling 
process is properly documented.  
• Train all personnel handling and transporting high-pressure cylinders on the 
proper procedures and safety precautions. 
• Train all personnel on the importance of monitoring environmental conditions and 
identifying the early signs of corrosion.  
• Foster a culture of safety and diligence regarding the handling and maintenance 
of gas cylinders. 
• Regularly review and update high-pressure cylinder safety procedures to ensure 
compliance with current DOT regulations. 
• Implement a robust inspection program and monitoring system to track the 
condition of high-pressure cylinders and storage racks regularly. Establish a 
reporting mechanism for any observed deterioration or safety concerns. 
• Establish a routine maintenance schedule that includes cleaning, inspection, and 
protective coating application to prevent corrosion. This should also involve 
checking for and addressing any crevices or pooling of water around the bases of 
the cylinders. 
 
By addressing these recommendations, the risk of future failures can be significantly 
reduced, ensuring the safety of personnel and the integrity of the storage system. 
– BSEE – 
 
 
A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It   also contains recommendations that 
could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
 
 
Category: Explosion  