

 
SAFETY ALERT 
Contact: bseepublicaffairs@bsee.gov 
Phone: (800) 200-4853 
  
  
 
 
  
 Lack of Adherence to Helideck Safety Procedures Results in  
Series of Near Miss Incidents 
 
        
     Figure 1: Offshore Helideck in Operation.                      Figure 2: Stowable Handrail on Helide. 
 
The Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement (BSEE) has observed a trend of 
safety incidents related to complacency and lack of compliance with established helideck safety 
policies and procedures. This pattern has given rise to near miss incidents, emphasizing the 
need for future continuous vigilance and strict adherence to safety protocols.  
 
The following incidents are examples of potential hazards associated with helideck 
operations:   
Incident 1 – Gas Venting During Helicopter Approach, 11/10/22:  
A hydrocarbon gas venting and flaring event occurred while a helicopter was making a final 
approach for landing. Because of effective communications and prompt actions, a potential 
serious aviation incident was averted. The incident underscores the importance of continuous 
situational awareness. Refer to BSEE Safety Alert 311 Methane Venting Hazard to Helicopter 
Operations. 
 
Incident 2 – Foreign Object Debris (FOD) Left on Helideck, 01/24/23:  
A loose rope/FOD was left exposed on a helideck during aviation operations. The object created 
the potential for aviation safety incidents, trip and fall hazards, and marine debris.  
 
 
 
  
 
Safety Alert No. 479 
January 16, 2024 

 
 
Incident 3 – Grease Slip Hazard on Helideck, 03/07/23:  
Grease left on the helideck following a maintenance procedure mixed with rain and immediately 
posed a slip, trip, and fall hazard. It also posed a landing hazard and caused confusion during 
aircraft inspections.  
 
Incident 4 – Unsafe Approach to Running Helicopter, 03/07/23:  
Personnel unsafely approached a running helicopter on an offshore helideck, which emphasizes 
the importance of adhering to safety protocols. For further details, see BSEE Safety Alert 474 
BSEE Issues Recommendations for Safely Approaching, Entering and Exiting a 
Helicopter on Offshore Helidecks. 
 
Incident 5 – Crane Interference During Landing, 08/03/23:  
A helicopter was erroneously given a green deck clearance for landing despite the hazard posed 
by an improperly stowed crane interfering with the helicopter’s safe approach.
1
 The air crew 
recognized the safety hazard and effectively communicated with the operator, ensuring a safe 
landing. Because of effective communications and prompt actions, a potential serious aviation 
incident was averted. 
 
Incident 6 – Stowable Handrail Obstruction, 11/06/23:  
A helicopter was erroneously given a green deck clearance for landing despite the hazard posed 
by a stowable helideck handrail that had been left in the up position. The air crew recognized the 
hazard and promptly communicated with the ground crew to avoid the hazard. Because of 
effective communications and prompt actions, a potential serious aviation incident was averted. 
 
In light of the above incidents, BSEE recommends that operators and their 
contractors, where appropriate, consider the following:  
 
• Ensuring personnel are instructed and familiar with related policies and 
procedures to prevent incidents during helideck operations. 
 
• Ensuring safety-critical operations are well planned, with the proper controls in 
place for flawless execution.  
 
• Reviewing policy guidelines in the organizational Health, Safety and 
Environmental (HSE) manual, including area-specific regulatory requirements 
and recommended practices. 
 
• Evaluating operations for signs of weakness or noncompliance, implementing 
specific actions to correct any identified issues. 
 
1
 Per 30 CFR 250.108, Cranes positioned in the proximity of Helidecks or Approach/Take-off Zones are not operated 
during helicopter operations in accordance with API RP 2D, Paragraph 3.1.5M. 

 
 
 
• Developing and implementing facility-specific helicopter operations procedures to 
eliminate uncertainties and enhance safety protocols.  
 
• Considering proper Helideck Management Principles for Pre-arrival Briefings and 
Toolbox Meetings.  
 
 
Additionally, BSEE encourages industry to review the following helpful information to 
minimize risks to passengers, helideck crews, and workers involved in offshore helideck 
operations: 
 
• HSAC RP 163 Inspection, Maintenance  
   and Operation of Offshore Helidecks. 
 
• HSAC RP 165 Air Operator Guidelines 
  for Offshore Helicopter Operations – 1st     
  Edition. See section15. Passenger  
  Control. 
 
• BSEE Safety Alert No. 322 / Helideck  
  Obstructions and Compounding Procedural    
  Errors Contribute to Five Near Misses on  
  OCS. 
 
• NTL 2021-N03 – Helideck Closures and  
Markings. 
 
 
 
– BSEE – 
 
 
A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the circumstances 
surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations that could assist avoiding potential 
incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
 
 
Category: Aviation 