

 
SAFETY ALERT 
Contact: bseepublicaffairs@bsee.gov 
Phone: (800) 200-4853 
  
  
 
 
 
Extreme Caution Advised During Swing Rope Transfers 
 
Personnel transfers using swing ropes and baskets present a considerable risk for 
offshore workers. The most recent example is a fractured foot sustained by a worker 
attempting to use a swing rope to board a satellite platform from a work boat. As the 
captain maneuvered the boat, the worker placed his foot on a bumper tire to position 
himself for the swing. The worker’s foot slipped between the tire and the boat when the 
tire hit the platform, resulting in injury.   
As outlined in BSEE Safety Alert No. 331
, issued on April 4, 2018, the inherent danger 
of these operations led us to recommend operators perform hazard analyses (both at 
the facility-level and task-level) to help mitigate these risks. 
Additional swing rope incidents BSEE has reviewed since issuing Safety Alert No. 331 
include: 
•    An employee lacerated his shin after it struck the rear of a vessel as 
he was completing a swing.  
  
  
 
Safety Alert No. 456 
Feb. 21, 2023 

 
 
• An employee fell into the water between a workboat and a platform 
when he misjudged the distance between the boat’s deck and the 
top of a swell during a swing rope transfer. As he made his swing, 
the wave shifted the boat, moving the landing area. When the 
employee let go of the swing rope, he fell into the water. He was 
quickly retrieved from the water and did not sustain injuries. 
Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators and their contractors, where 
appropriate, do the following: 
• Treat all offshore personnel transfers as stand-alone operations and conduct a 
formal risk assessment before a transfer occurs. A stop work authority should 
be initiated. if there are any concerns regarding the safety of the operation,  
• Verify personnel competencies regarding the proper utilization of swing ropes 
on offshore assets where swing ropes are used to ensure all personnel 
understand and recognize the applicable safety aspects. 
Because of the inherent risks involved, BSEE also recommends: 
   Using alternative methods where practicable. 
   Routinely ensuring the adequacy of training and competency 
assessments of everyone involved with personnel transfer 
responsibilities. 
   Following IADC “Correct Usage of Rope Swings”
 guidelines. 
Additional risk assessments and verification of vessel seaworthiness include, but are 
not limited to the following: 
• Ensure Master has clear visibility of the transfer area directly or via 
closed-circuit television (CCTV). 
• Ensure deck space in the transfer area is free from obstructions. 
• Ensure there is clear space for vessel crew members to assist transferring 
personnel. 
• Install non-slip deck coatings at and around the transfer location. 
• Ensure functionality of personnel locator beacon (PLB) system for man 
overboard incidents. 
• Determine ability to recover a    person from the water using only the 
minimum number of persons onboard. 

 
 
• Verify functionality of Offshore Personnel Transfer Systems (OPTS) that 
are installed on-board platforms and vessels for the purpose of 
providing safe transfer of personnel. 
• Consider using gangway systems or elevated structures (Jump Box) to 
equalize or elevate personnel so they never have to swing upward to a 
vessel or platform. 
 
 
 
– BSEE – 
 
 
A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations that 
could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
 
 
Category: Cranes/Lifting  