U.S. Department of the Interior
Minerals Management Service
Gulf of Mexico OCS Region
Safety Alert No. 192 revised
January 29, 2001
Contact: Jack Leezy
504-736-2503
Water Survival Craft
The MMS is revising Safety Alert No. 192 by changing the seat widths as reflected inthe report. The revised
Safety Alert follows.
The Minerals Management Service (MMS) and the United States Coast Guard (USCG) have examined a report
of  a  study  conducted  by  an  offshore  operator  of  their  survival  craft  payloads.  This  study  looked  at  the
manufacturer’s design standards for several models of covered survival craft (lifeboats) used on the operator’s
offshore facilities. During this examination, the operator discovered that some of their survival craft were rated
by the manufacturer to accommodate more personnel than the operator could properly seat within the unit. This
was  confirmed  during  several  field  trials.  The  operator  concluded  that  this  occurredbecause  the  "average"
worker on their offshore facilities was larger than the approved design standard usedto build the survival craft.
The personnel weight standard used for the design of survival craft is 165 pounds with a seat width of 17 inches.
Although this standard may be appropriate for the offshore industry in other areas ofthe world, it  may not be
appropriate for personnel working in the GOM. The operator’s study concluded that theaverage  offshore
worker  at  their  facilities  weighs  210  pounds  and  has  a  seat  width of  21  inches.  Therefore,  the  difference  in
weight  and  width of  the  design standard  and  that  of  the  personnel in the  offshore  industry  in the  GOM  could
have  an  effect  on  the  seating  capacity,  stability,  buoyancy,  and  structural  adequacyof  the  survival  craft.  To
accommodate the larger personnel at their GOM facilities properly, the operator choseto reconfigure some of
the seating, as well as de-rate the overall capacity of selected survival craft.
The operator examined this same issue with respect to liferafts, but did not observea similar problem.
Operators  are  advised  to  be  aware  of  these  potential  overloading  situations  on survival  craft  caused  by  the
larger  size  of  the  average  GOM  offshore  worker.For  more  information,  operators  are  urged  to  contact
their nearest Coast Guard Officer in Charge of Marine Inspections.
—GOMR—MMS—
Visit our Safety Information Website
Safety Alert No. 185http://www.gomr.boemre.gov/homepg/offshore/safety/safealt/SA_192...
1 of 12/21/2012 4:30 PM