U.S. Department of the Interior
Minerals Management Service
Gulf of Mexico OCS Region
Safety Alert No. 195
June 1, 2001
Contact: David Dykes
504-736-3249
Riser Skate/Casing Handling Carts
Two recent fatalities occurred in the Gulf of Mexico that involved riser skate/casinghandling
carts. Both incidents occurred on semi-submersible mobile offshore drilling units. Inthe first
incident, two floorhands were connecting a stand of drill pipe with the iron roughneck when
the riser casing cart began to move toward the drill floor from its parked position outside the
drill floor area. The cart struck and fatally pinned one floorhand against the iron roughneck.
The investigation into the first incident revealed that the cart brakes were in a state of
disrepair and contaminated with grease. The sea conditions at the time of the incident and
the list of the drilling unit created enough force to cause the cart to begin to move.
Furthermore, this cart did not have a secondary braking/locking device to prevent unwanted
movement.
The second incident occurred while the mobile offshore drilling unit was under tow. The
riser skate was moved forward from its stowed position onto the drill floor with thefront end
of the riser skate across the gantry crane’s track. The gantry crane was moving from
starboard to port when the front leg of the crane struck the riser cart and knocked it off of its
tracks. As a result, a roustabout, who was walking between the riser skate and V-doorport
wind wall, was fatally pinned by the cart against the wind wall.
The investigation into the second fatality revealed that the drilling contractor hadnot
conducted a formal hazards analysis to identify all potential hazards associated withusing
the cart and gantry crane simultaneously.
It is therefore recommended that all drilling contractors who have riser skates/casing
handling or similar type of equipment should conduct a review of their operation and
maintenance of this equipment. The purpose of the review should be to identify any
weaknesses and critical elements. Their review should consider, as a minimum, the
following:
The use of a hazards analysis of the operation to identify potential hazards. The
analysis should result in the necessary job safety analyses and procedures for use of
the equipment.
The development and implementation of detailed inspection and maintenance
procedures for all critical operating components of the equipment. The inspection and
maintenance procedures should also include the process for documenting inspection
findings and corrective action taken.
The requirement of the use of a pin-type, positive locking device or other method to
Safety Alert No. 194http://www.gomr.boemre.gov/homepg/offshore/safety/safealt/SA_195...
1 of 22/21/2012 4:31 PM

prevent unwanted movement when the cart assembly is not in use.
—GOMR—MMS—
Visit our Safety Information Website
Safety Alert No. 194http://www.gomr.boemre.gov/homepg/offshore/safety/safealt/SA_195...
2 of 22/21/2012 4:31 PM