

 
Safety Alert No. 397                               Contact: Jason Mathews 
October 2, 2020                                         Phone: (504) 731-1496 
 
 Fire Tube Hazards Increase Risk of Flame Migration  
 
                                                              
In October 2019, BSEE inspectors identified deficiencies associated with the fire tubes of 
multiple vessels during an annual inspection of a production platform. The problem resulted 
in the issuance of Incidents of Noncompliance. 
               
 
The failures occurred because the flange faces of the flame arrestor housings   were not 
flush, which is essential to its function. The resulting gap allowed the potential for flame 
migration to occur from the firing chamber to the Class I Division 2 Hazardous 
environment directly outside the process component. 
The fire tubes for both the Heater Treater and Glycol Reboiler units were removed, 
inspected, and reinstalled a month prior to the arrival of BSEE inspectors. The fasteners 
(i.e. nuts and bolts) used for the reinstallation in September 2019 were not Original 
Equipment Manufacturer (OEM) parts and therefore, not compatible with the vessels. 
Despite the improper reinstallation, the vessels were brought back online and production 
continued.  
At the time of BSEE’s inspection, the flange faces were visibly warped and a gap in the 
flange created a path for flame migration due to the insufficient fastener assembly. 
 
Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators and contractors consider the 
following: 
•    Create a fit for purpose Pre-Startup Review when disassembling equipment for 
routine maintenance to verify that proper reinstallation procedures are implemented 
SAFETY ALERT 
 
 
Improper bolts on a Glycol Reboiler      A warped Reboiler flange         A gap in a Heater Treater flange is shown with no Gasket 

A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations 
that could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
 
appropriately prior to returning equipment online; 
•    Ensure only OEM recommended parts are applied to their associated equipment 
rated for a specific service; 
• Increase visual inspection frequencies of flame arrestors to ensure an adequate 
flange face seal is intact; 
• Examine the fit and make-up of all parts around the flame arrestor housing during 
any maintenance that disturbs OEM connections in order to eliminate any flow path 
around the fired component that would negate its efficacy; and, 
• Review this Safety Alert in conjunction with Safety Bulletin No. 012 to prevent gaps 
in    a flange face. 
 
--BSEE-- 
 