

                  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
	 



	 
Safety Alert No. 248 Contact: Frank Pausina 
December             28,             2006             504-736-2560             
Stainless Steel Tubing-Related Fires 
In two separate incidents, tubing related failures resulted in fires that caused damage to their respective 
facilities. 
In one incident, the investigation revealed that a ½-inch stainless steel tubing between the glycol pump 
and the glycol tower parted from a fitting located at the base of the glycol tower and upsteam of the tower 
SDV, resulting in glycol, condensate, and gas spraying onto the glycol reboiler and igniting. Most of the 
glycol equipment required replacement. PSV’s within the glycol unit’s skid were piped locally and 
resulted in difficulty extinguishing the fire. The cause of the parting of the tubing from the fitting was 
concluded to be vibration caused by the glycol pump.  
In the other incident, the investigation revealed that a 1-inch stainless steel supply tubing to a gas 
scrubber parted from a nut and feral compression fitting. The resultant gas escape was ignited by an 
unknown ignition source but self-extinguished. Although the exact cause of the separation of the tubing is 
not known, gas metering pressure charts indicate a period, near the time of the incident, of over-pressure 
from an unexplained source that is concluded to be a possible cause of the separation. Furthermore, since 
the skirting of the helideck was damaged during the previous hurricane season, it was concluded that 
weather-related incidents could have either damaged or at least weakened the tubing at the point of 
separation. 
Considering the conclusions from both investigations, MMS makes the following recommendations: 
•	 Safety policy and procedures regarding tubing sizing, configuration, operational stability, 

maintenance, and inspections should be reviewed for adequacy.  

•	 All such reviews should take into consideration the possibility that facilities with known damages 
resulting from the recent 2005 hurricanes could have also incurred nominal, undetected damages 
that to date have worsened and may currently represent a potential safety hazard. 
All of the MMS investigation reports on these incidents are available for viewing at the following MMS 
website: http://www.gom
r.mms.gov/homepg/offshore/safety/safety.html 
—MMS—GOMR— 
www.gomr.mms.gov 