Safety Alert No. 169 - Personnel Falls Result in Three Fatalities http://www.gomr.boemre.gov/homepg/offshore/safety/safealt/SA_169... 
U.S.    Department of the Interior  
Minerals Management Service  
Gulf of Mexico OCS Region  
Notice No. 169 
November 4, 1996 
Personnel Falls Result in Three Fatalities 
A fatality occurred while two personnel were tightening bolts on a flare line flange at the +10 level of a platform. 
The two workers had climbed out on a brace at the +10 level with a hammer and wrench to tighten the flange 
bolts. A falling object inflicted a serious head injury to one of the workers and also caused that worker to fall into 
the Gulf of Mexico. The other worker jumped into the water and pulled the injured worker to the platform. Using 
both workers' work vests to help keep the injured worker afloat and to secure him to the platform, the uninjured 
worker reboarded the platform and summoned help. A motor vessel responded to the call for help and personnel 
aboard the vessel assisted in lifting the injured worker onto the deck of the vessel. The injured worker was 
raised by basket to the platform where he was given CPR. He was air-lifted to a hospital, where he was 
pronounced dead on arrival. The cause of death was listed as drowning due to acute asphyxia. Both of the 
workers were not wearing safety belts with lifelines attached to the platform. 
Another fatality occurred as personnel were in the process of removing temporary scaffolding and angle iron 
supports from a newly installed subcellar deck. The subcellar deck was being prepared for sandblasting and 
painting. One of the workers was working on the underside of the deck with a cutting torch to remove the 
temporary angle iron supports. The worker was standing on 2-inch scaffold pipe and holding onto either the deck 
or handrails when he fell into the Gulf of Mexico. An immediate search of the area under the deck by platform 
personnel and a search of the Gulf of Mexico waters by motor vessel and helicopter failed to locate the worker. 
The worker was not wearing a life jacket, but was wearing a safety belt with lifeline; however, the lifeline was 
apparently not properly tied off. 
A third fatality occurred as three personnel were working from an elevated work platform commonly called the 
Texas deck. The Texas deck had been positioned around the blowout preventer (BOP) stack approximately 40 
feet above the platform well deck. A 2-inch by 12-inch by 16-ft scaffold board was installed across the Texas 
deck. As the three workers were in the process of attaching winch cables to the BOP stack the scaffold board 
broke. One of the workers was wearing a safety belt with lifeline attached and another worker was able to hold 
onto existing piping and the BOP stack. The third worker fell approximately 40 feet to the platform well deck. 
CPR was administered to the fall victim but he was unresponsive. 
In all three of these accidents the fatally injured personnel were not using personal fall-arrest equipment, and in 
one the individual was not wearing a life jacket while working outside of handrails. Therefore, it is essential that a 
life jacket/personal floatation device and/or a safety belt harness with 
lifeline properly secured should be standard equipment and worn at all times by personnel who are working in 
areas that dictate the use of such equipment. Supervisors should monitor workers to ensure that they are 
wearing the proper protective equipment and that personal fall-arrest systems are being used in a manner that 
will protect personnel. 
-MMS-GOMR-
MMS Internet Homepage: http://www.mms.gov 
1 of 1 2/21/2012 4:11 PM