

Contact: bseepublicaffairs@bsee.gov 
Phone: (800) 200-4853 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
BSEE Identifies Maintenance and Certification Issues 
of Rental Generators 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
During start-up and commissioning, several rental generator incidents occurred on the 
U.S. Outer Continental Shelf (OCS) in 2021. These incidents involved rental generator 
failures resulting in fires, arc flashes, and work stoppages. Lack of certifying rental 
equipment integrity (e.g., inadequately/improperly maintained generator) has been 
shown to be one of the key indicators leading to these incidents.  
 
Contributing Factors: 
 
A review of the investigation reports for rental generator incidents indicate that many are 
attributed to the following: 
 
• Lack of quality control commissioning checks to identify risks. 
 
• Crews were unfamiliar with the detailed system specifications, and there 
were no formal handover processes between construction/installation and 
operations. 
 
  
 
Safety Alert No. 432 
March 9, 2022  
SAFETY ALERT 
 
 
Fig. 1. Rental Generator 
Fig. 2. Burnt Stator Winding of Generator 

• There was worn defective main-stator windings and insulation 
disintegration.  
 
• Moisture ingress in the windings terminal enclosure resulting in the short-
circuiting of the rental generator.  
 
• A short-circuit developed into a line-to-ground fault, resulting in a fire and 
arc flash within the rental generator. 
 
• Corrosion and rust build-up in the generator's internal components caused 
an electrical short.  
 
Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators consider:  
 
• Checking to confirm that rental generators are recertified for service by 
reviewing preventive maintenance records and documents before usage.   
 
• Ensuring quality control inspections during installations and commissioning 
of equipment are sufficient to verify that equipment and components meet 
approved Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM) specifications. 
 
• Ensuring equipment suppliers provide adequate documentation, including 
specifications, drawings, and commissioning procedures. 
 
• Ensuring offshore personnel are engaged early in the project to enhance 
system familiarization. 
 
• Providing thorough instructions, training, competency assessment, and 
supervision to equipment operators and maintenance personnel. 
 
• Operations should perform insulation resistance testing on windings before 
commissioning to ensure windings are free of moisture and be prepared to 
dry windings if moisture is detected. 
 
• Operations should develop an installation and commissioning checklist that 
includes steps to ensure consistent, safe operation of rental equipment. 
 
• Establishing and documenting monitoring procedures to identify potential 
problems associated with moisture ingress/build-up and overheating (e.g., 
periodic visual inspection, use thermal vision inspections, resistance 
checks, and cleaning).  
 
• Conducting insulation resistance measurements to verify there are no shorts 
or deterioration in the insulation (after installation). 
 

• Ensuring operation, maintenance, and safety information is readily available 
before usage. 
 
• Ensuring the knowledge, skills, and experience of electricians and 
technicians involved with the installation and start-up of the rental generator 
before the equipment arrives on-site and during the Job Safety Analysis 
(JSA). 
 
• Ensuring installation practices are documented and meet fundamental 
electrical safety principles, including protection against overcurrent and 
ground-fault current per API RP14F & 14FZ. 
 
• Ensuring compliance with 30 CFR 250.867(d) temporary quarters and 
temporary equipment and 250.842(a)(2) & 250.842(a)(3) - Approval of 
safety systems design and installation features. 
 
• Ensuring rental generators are suitable for the area classification in which 
they are installed per API 500 & API 505. 
 
− BSEE − 
 
 
 
A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations that 
could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
 
 
Category: Rental Generators  