

 
 
                   
                     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
   
  
 
Safety Alert No. 249 Contact:  David Dykes 
February 13, 2007 504-736-3249 
Training 
Since the implementation of the Subpart O performance-based training rule, MMS has observed a trend 
that has raised concerns within the agency.  From October 15, 2002, to present, MMS has issued 42 
training-related incidents of noncompliance (INCs) to 27 different operators.  The majority of these INC’s 
have centered around the operators’ evaluations of their contractors, either in their failure to conduct an 
evaluation of the contractors’ training plans or their failure to verify that the contractor personnel were 
trained. 
Studies sponsored by MMS and the American Petroleum Institute have concluded that between 25% and 
33% of all remaining undeveloped reservoirs are not drillable by using conventional overbalanced drilling 
methods, caused in large part by the increased likelihood of well control problems such as differential 
sticking, lost circulation, kicks, and blowouts.   This challenge of efficiently drilling and developing these 
reservoirs in a manner no less safe than current drilling methods is compounded by an inexperienced 
workforce. 
MMS has observed a large number of experienced and knowledgeable personnel moving from the shelf 
into the deepwater drilling and production operations.  This movement of people, together with the 
increased level of activity in the Gulf of Mexico, has created voids that are being filled with 
inexperienced personnel (less than 10 years’ total experience), such as toolpushers, drillers, production 
foremen, and senior production operators, in key positions.  This increased level of activity has also 
forced some companies to use foreign nationals as part of the workforce; resultant language barriers could 
create additional unsafe conditions in the work environment. 
As a result of informal MMS interviews of both operator and contractor personnel, it appears that while 
personnel on the production facilities appear to be knowledgeable of general production safety systems, 
those same personnel are sometimes unfamiliar with the specific platform and the associated production 
safety systems that they are assigned to operate.  Personnel indicated that they were assigned to the 
facilities with little or no site-specific training on the operation of the facility.  MMS reminds operators 
that, as per 30 CFR 250.1500, “production safety” means production operations as well as the 
installation, repair, testing, maintenance, or operation of surface or subsurface safety devices. 
Therefore, MMS recommends that operators review and evaluate the adequacy of their training program 
and policies with specific consideration being given to the following:  
• Additional training of those inexperienced personnel to ensure appropriate competency 
• Implementation of site specific hands-on training and/or evaluations 
• Incorporation of new technology and new issues into training curriculum 
-
www.gomr.mms.gov -