

 
SAFETY ALERT 
Contact: bseepublicaffairs@bsee.gov 
Phone: (800) 200-4853 
  
`   
 
 
 
BSEE Identifies Bypassed Safety Device Deficiencies   
during Risk-Based Inspections 
Members of the Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement (BSEE) Gulf of 
America Region (GOAR) identified a potential risk associated with bypassed safety 
devices and inconsistent interpretation of regulations after multiple incidents of 
noncompliance were issued associated with the operator’s failure to comply with 30 
CFR 250.869 and 30 CFR 250.870 in 2025. 
The BSEE Performance-Based Risk Inspection (PBRI) covered five assets (all 
production platforms) in the GOAR, which five separate operators operated. 
What BSEE’s PBRI Found: 
• Multiple facilities and operators had internal policies to flag/tag temporarily out-of-
service safety devices and track bypasses; however, inspections revealed that 
facility personnel were not adequately documenting these bypasses 
electronically or in hard copy. 
 
• BSEE inspection teams observed several facilities’ data historians to be non-
operational. A data historian is a software application that collects, stores, and 
retrieves time-series data from various sources, allowing operators to analyze 
  
 
Safety Alert No. 501 
June 9, 2025 
Figure 1: An example image of electronic monitoring system. 

 
 
historical data related to alarms, control actions, and other operational events. 
 
• BSEE found that operators commonly utilized a “maintenance bypass” whenever 
they needed a bypass. A “maintenance bypass” offers more robustness than a 
standard bypass. With a standard bypass, an operator can choose a specific 
function to bypass for a particular device. In contrast, a “maintenance bypass” 
stops the device from triggering the safety system across the entire 4-20 mA 
range and beyond, even if the device experiences a fault or loses power. 
 
• “Maintenance bypasses” are popular because operators can use the same 
bypass function for startup, maintenance, and testing, thereby preventing 
nuisance trips. However, during startup, a "maintenance bypass" may be 
selected for a pressure transmitter that provides both pressure safety high (PSH) 
and pressure safety low (PSL) functions. In this case, the PSH and PSL are 
disabled, rather than just bypassing the PSL. BSEE has found that in some 
startup situations, it is unnecessary to bypass the PSH. In these cases, this 
practice fails to meet the "minimum" number of devices that can be bypassed 
according to 30 CFR 250.869, which increases operational risk by disabling 
primary pressure protection. 
• BSEE found that some platforms had actions entitled “group bypass selectors.” 
This option bypasses several devices at once and is useful for some applicable 
operations. In most scenarios, control room operators and their competency were 
the only barrier to ensuring the minimum number of devices in bypass. For 
example, the operator did not have a preset list of minimum bypasses that are 
needed for common operations on the facility. 
 
• BSEE found that some operators kept devices in bypass for longer durations. 
Operators cited nuisance trips and alarms, such as sea state and weather, for 
reasons associated with bypasses for extended periods on sumps and 
emergency shutdown devices (ESDs) at the boat landing. One operator had 
examples of allowable bypasses extending for 12 hours and only requiring a 
conversation with a control room operator and the offshore installation manager. 
 
• During the inspection, multiple operators indicated that they were allowed to 
place devices in bypass for “repair” and “troubleshooting.” Multiple operators had 
different interpretations of 30 CFR 250.869A, which states, “Surface or 
subsurface safety devices must not be bypassed or blocked out of service unless 
they are temporarily out of service for startup, maintenance, or testing.” 
Specifically, “maintenance” was not well defined within operator procedures. 
 
• Multiple operators had safety system bypass procedures requiring certain 
personnel to review adherence to the operator’s procedure by conducting an 
audit. The audit’s results and actions were also required to be documented and 
shared with relevant personnel. Unfortunately, the operator did not provide audits 

 
 
of this nature or scope were not provided by the operator for the subject facilities 
to BSEE during the PBRI. 
 
• BSEE found one instance where an operator had mistakenly bypassed the entire 
safety system while the facility was producing. In this case, a project team altered 
ladder logic to bypass groups of devices that were needed for the construction 
process while the facility was offline. However, when the facility went back online, 
these ladder logic changes were not reverted, and entire groups of devices were 
unknowingly in bypass.  
As a result of these findings, BSEE recommends: 
• Operators should document all authorized safety system bypasses, inhibits, or 
overrides in logs that capture identification tags, equipment identification, 
reasons, applications, and removal details. If data historians cannot capture this 
data, a written process should document all bypasses. 
 
• Operators should document any changes to the ladder logic needed for 
construction and ensure that these changes are reverted before the project's 
completion. 
 
• Operators should evaluate their offshore data historian and determine if they can 
record and store electronic data records when operator interventions occur. 
 
• Industry should ensure that a computer-based system's human-machine 
interface (HMI) can display all bypassed safety devices and operational 
conditions. 
 
• Industry should review and document bypasses associated with “repair” and 
“troubleshooting.” Any bypass should include the date and time of the installation 
and removal of the bypass and the reason. Also, if the bypass is associated with 
any “repairs” or “troubleshooting,” supporting documentation should be included 
within the bypass log to capture the associated work activity. Operators should 
consider referencing API RP 14C 8
th
 edition for bypass applications regarding 
“maintenance” activities: Maintenance bypasses allow repairing a failed or failing 
safety function device without a process upset.  
 
• Operators should develop systems to verify compliance with their safety system 
bypass procedures. 
 
– BSEE – 
 
 
A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations that 
could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
 
 
Category: Process Safety, Personnel Safety  