

 
 
Safety Alert No. 367                          Contact: Stephen Harris 
October 2, 2019                       Phone: (504) 736-3249 
 
 
 
Saturated Glycol Handling Leads to Fire 
 
 
Fire damage was caused when an unattended glycol reboiler was starting up. The glycol 
and hydrogen condensate ignited. 
 
In January 2019, a fire occurred on a production platform resulting in damage to a glycol 
reboiler unit and compressor building.  
 
Prior to the fire, and after an extended shut-in,    platform personnel began the platform start-
up process. The field foreman ignited the glycol reboiler and set the temperature to 200º F. 
The foreman continued the start up by increasing the temperature to 250º F, but did not 
initiate circulating the reboiler fluid contents. The field foreman left the glycol reboiler 
unattended to  handle a compressor shutdown and other duties as the temperature 
increased. Less than 90 minutes later, a mechanic observed a large flame on the side of 
the platform where the glycol reboiler unit is located. 
 
BSEE’s investigation revealed that the operator’s start-up procedure did not provide specifics 
on the rate of temperature increase when starting the reboiler after an extended shut-in, nor 
did the procedure note that the reboiler should not be left unattended during start-up.  
 
 
SAFETY ALERT 
 
 

A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations 
that could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
The fluid in the glycol reboiler had approximately 21% water content at the time of startup, 
possibly due to the extended shut-in. During normal operations, the typical water content of 
the reboiler should be less than 6%.  
 
BSEE determined the cause of the fire to be high water content combined with a rapid 
increase in temperature, which flooded the still column; the flooded still column expelled 
glycol and hydrocarbon condensate onto the reboiler stack, where it ignited.  
 
Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators consider the following: 
 
•    Provide advanced training to personnel who work with glycol units to address 
handling saturated glycol safely; 
 
•    Ensure that procedures specify that glycol system start-up should be a manned 
operation; 
 
•    Ensure that procedures specify circulation time before increasing boiler temperature; 
and 
 
•    Review reboiler stack installations and consider adding insulation to mitigate the 
stack as an ignition source. 
 
For more information on this incident, see the incident report here
 or at the following url: 
https://on.doi.gov/2nPJGr7 
 