

Contact: bseepublicaffairs@bsee.gov 
Phone: (800) 200-4853 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
On 24 April 2021, while a lift boat (L/B) was performing plugging and abandonment work next 
to a fixed facility, the L/B crane operator notified the contract supervisor that the L/B needed to 
be raised because of rough seas. After a toolbox talk with all personnel, the crane operator 
started slacking off a few feet of the L/B crane’s load line because it was attached to a 
wellhead via 4.1-ton dual slings. A well service operator and a helper stayed on the platform to 
disconnect chain binders securing the gangway to the platform during the lifting operation. The 
crane operator then informed the first mate that it was okay to change the hydraulic system 
over to operate the legs of the L/B
[1]
. At this time, the crane operator exited the crane cab and 
went to help the contract supervisor on deck, leaving no one to monitor the crane’s load line 
and slings. The L/B rose approximately two feet when it is suspected the slings caught on the 
wellhead hanger pins and snapped, striking, and injuring the well service operator.    
 
[1]
 According to the Incident report, the L/B’s crane has no hydraulic pressure during the lifting/lowering 
operations, which renders the hydraulic controls systems inoperable, preventing any adjustments to the 
crane’s position or load lines.  
  
 
Safety Alert No. 429 
February 25, 2022  
SAFETY ALERT 
 
 
Jacking Up Lift Boat During Crane Operations  
Causes Injury 
 

Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators consider:  
 
• Disconnecting all platform L/B interface connections during L/B jacking 
operations, including crane load line(s) and gangways. 
 
• Ensuring the connected rigging hardware is free and clear when the crane’s load 
line is attached to component and before changing elevations. 
 
• Reminding crane operators that they need to remain attentive, in control, and in 
the crane cab while attached to a load to ensure a safe and successful crane 
operation.  
 
• Adopting a Standard Operating Procedure for L/B elevation adjustments during 
operations.  
 
• Developing policy/procedure to require a Job Safety Analysis to be conducted for 
when a L/B needs to be raised or lowered during well work or construction 
activities.  
 
• Ensuring all hazards are identified and addressed in JSA before and during the 
operation, especially L/B and platform/well interconnect and interface hazards.  
 
• Removing the gangway before raising or lowering a L/B.  
• Ensuring L/B cranes are operating within crane manufacturer’s parameters with 
all systems functioning properly.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations that 
could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
 
 
Category: Cranes/Lifting, Personnel Safety  