U.S. Department of the Interior
Minerals Management Service
Gulf of Mexico OCS Region
Safety Alert No. 199Contact: Buddy Stewart
November 15, 2001337-289-5108
Blowout and Fire
After a slip-on wellhead (SOW) had been set on a 10¾-inch surface casing, and during the welding of
theinside of the SOW, gas and liquid were observed escaping from the +10 valve. The +10 valve was
closed and 8.6-ppg seawater was added to the annulus through a ½-inch gap between the wellhead’s
24-
inch base plate and the 10¾-inch casing, in an attempt to kill the well. It should be noted that a
16-inch scab liner was hung from the drive pipe. The well continued to flow, so the fluid was weighted
up to 9.2-ppg mud, and then later increased to 16-ppg mud. It became more difficult to maintain a
steady rate and quantity of mud flow because of the mud’s density and the size of the opening
between the base plate and the surface casing. As the gas flow increased, the +10 valve was opened in
order to allow the 16-ppg mud to displace the lighter fluid in the 24-inch x 10¾-inch annulus. With gas
fl
ow still increasing, the decision was made to evacuate the rig. The +10 valve was left opened in an
effort to divert the flow of gas away from the platform and rig. Approximately a day later, fire erupted
on the platform from an unknown source and caused extensive damage to the platform and drilling rig.
The MMS investigation of the accident revealed in part that, while the source of the blowout, namely
shallow gas, was identified through well log data, the cement program was not properly designed for
the presence of shallow gas. The failure of the operator to communicate the presence of shallow gas to
the contract cement service company resulted in the improper design of the cement. It was further
revealed that a pre-spud meeting, in which the presence of known shallow gas could have been
communicated to all parties involved in the drilling operation, was not conducted.
It is therefore recommended that operators:
1. Review their current specific strategies regarding the prevention of gas migration into the
cement column.
2. Review their method of communication with contract cement companies regarding shallow-gas
hazards.
3. Review their procedures by which well log information indicating shallow gas is used in the
proper design of their cement program.
—GOMR—MMS—
Vi
sit our Safety Information Website
Safety Alert No. 199http://www.gomr.boemre.gov/homepg/offshore/safety/safealt/SA_199...
1 of 12/21/2012 4:34 PM