

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MMS 
U.S. Department of the Interior 
Minerals Management Service 
 Gulf of Mexico OCS Region
 Safety 
Alert 
Safety Alert No. 259 Contact:  Lance Labiche
 
16 January 2008 (504) 736-2433 

Catastrophic Failures in Mooring Systems 

Possibly Put Floating Structures at Risk
 
The U. S. Coast Guard, 8
th
 District and the MMS have agreed to issue this joint Safety Alert 
In two separate incidents, a catastrophic failure occurred in a 
portion of an anchoring system.  One component failed on a 
system in the Gulf of Mexico.  The other was found during 
installation to be defective after a similar component failed 
overseas. 
Incident No. 1: A one-ton, 8+ inch-diameter shackle connecting a 
mooring system to anchoring pilings failed on an overseas floating 
production facility.  Subsequently, an identical shackle scheduled 
to be used in a deepwater GOM production facility also failed 
catastrophically under test loads below specifications.  Operator 
reviews of the manufacturing and testing procedure and additional 
material testing indicated that all of 
the shackles were possibly 
defective. 
Because anchor pilings with 
shackles attached had already been driven, the GOM test failure 
required new shackles to be manufactured, new pilings installed, 
and the replacement of portions of the mooring systems that 
could not be recovered.  Production start-up of the facility has 
been delayed by at least one year. 
Incident No. 2: Two sockets in a mooring system for a MODU 
failed under moderate loading.  Testing of the remaining sockets 
found that others were also defective and a number of them failed 
Failed Mooring Socket 
catastrophically at less than specification loading. 
Example: Mooring Shackle 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The MMS and the U.S.C.G., 8
th
 District, concluded the following: 
•	 In both cases the manufacturing procedures are thought to have been defective. Heat 
treating after casting apparently resulted in a metal unable to meet “Charpy” standards for 
material “toughness.” 
•	 In both cases, the operator’s and/or manufacturer’s specifications for the items were 
either out of date or inadequate. 
•	 In both cases the Operator’s material testing requirements were either not followed, or 
were not adequate to insure specifications were met. 
•	 Material handling during installation may have exposed the equipment to potential 
critical damage. 
The MMS recommends the following: 
•	 Operators should review their specifications requirements to insure testing and 

manufacturing produces a product that will meet the usage demands.   

•	 Operators should include sufficient Charpy testing requirements in the specifications to 
insure the materials and manufacturing process will produce a product of sufficient 
toughness. 
•	 Operators should review their requirements for both destructive and non-destructive 
testing of critical elements.  Operators should insure their test coupons are properly 
representative. 
•	 Operators should review their requirements for equipment inspection and handling to 
insure no damaging techniques are employed in transportation or installation. 
--MMS--GOMR--
www.gomr.mms.gov 