

 
Safety Alert No. 371                             Contact: Jason Mathews 
December 5, 2019                              Phone: (504) 731-1496 
 
 
Conductor Failures Put Workers’ Safety  
and the Environment at Risk 
 
         
 
 
 
 
BSEE has observed several 
conductor failures in recent 
inspections by BSEE inspectors and 
incident reports submitted by 
industry. Failure to maintain the 
integrity of the conductor can lead to 
parting of the conductor, external and 
internal corrosion, well and structural 
damage, collapse, and other negative 
affects like well blowouts.  
 
Corrosion of the inner wall may occur 
if water and air enter the annular 
space inside a conductor. This 
corrosion may not be observable until 
the conductor develops through-
thickness holes or fractures, which 
can further corrode the structure and 
other well components. 
SAFETY ALERT 
 
 
The conductor is severed near the water line, affecting the 
structural integrity of the well.   
The  conductor  has  a  fracture  and  is  leaning  to  the  side,  
causing stress on the associated equipment. 
The conductor (Drive Pipe) is parted below the bell guide. 

A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations 
that could assist avoiding potential incidents   on the Outer Continental Shelf.  
 
Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators consider the following: 
 
•    Prevent water and air from entering the conductor-casing annular space, and 
between the conductor and casing; 
 
•    Ensure any supports or clamps that are attached to a conductor do not accumulate 
water; 
•    Conductors should be properly supported and maintained for lateral loading. Do not 
use ropes or chains as a long-term solution to prevent movement; 
•    Maintain cathodic protection, verify that anodes are actively providing protection 
within performance requirements, and confirm voltage measurements are within 
acceptable range; and,  
•    Complete inspection testing on a recurring basis (e.g. ultrasonic/UT, laser, etc.) to 
determine the extent of metal loss and repair as needed. 
 
    
 
 
 
--BSEE-- 
 
The lack of lateral stabilization and conductor-casing annulus 
cover may reduce structural support of the conductor. 
The original support / framing collar at the top of this 
conductor is missing, exposing the insider. A new collar was 
welded to the top, but it is not connected to the Wellhead 
and does not fully cover the opening. 