U.S. Department of the Interior
Minerals Management Service
Gulf of Mexico OCS Region
Safety Alert No. 184
November 19, 1999
Contact: Frank Pausina
504-736-2560
Fire with Fatality and Injuries
An operator, in attempting to return to production a well that had been automaticallyshut in by an upset on
another platform, opened the well’s manual wing valve. The operator was unaware that the valve was opened
against a closed boarding shutdown valve on another platform. This caused the pressure in a flowline segment
on the platform to increase to a value that exceeded the segment’s working pressure. As a result, a flow safety
valve and a pig launcher located in the flowline segment failed, allowing gas, whichwas later ignited by an
unknown source, to escape. In attempting to escape the resultant fire, one operator jumped from a height of 52
feet and a pilot and another operator jumped from a height of 72 feet into the Gulf.One operator and the pilot
received various injuries, while the other operator was unable to be resuscitated after his retrieval from the Gulf.
Although written procedures existed for other types of operations for which unchanging specific steps were
required, there existed no written procedures for those operations, such as returninga well to production, for
which the steps to be followed could and/or must vary with location.
Therefore, from this information and information contained in the MMS report on the subject accident, the
following are recommended for operators:
1. Analyze all potentially dangerous operations for which specific procedural guidelines have not
been included in a safety/procedural document.
2. Formulate a set of required procedures for those operations and include such in a
safety/procedural document.
3. For an operation, such as bringing a well back on production, for which the procedural steps do
vary by well or location,
a. Formulate a set of procedures that address basic safety concerns that are
independent of well characteristics and/or location, such as observing pressure
gauges and being aware of flowline working pressures and valve status, and include
such in a safety/procedural document, and/or
b. Formulate a complete set of procedures for each well and/or location and include
such in a safety/procedural document.
4. Refer to API Recommended Practice 75, Second Edition, July 1998, in the implementation of
the above recommendations.
For details of the accident, see OCS Report MMS 99-0067. Copies of the report may beobtained from the
MMS Public Information Office, located at 1201 Elmwood Park Boulevard, New Orleans, Louisiana 70123
(1-800-200-GULF or local 504-736-2519).
—GOMR—MMS—
Visit our Safety Information Website
Safety Alert No. 184http://www.gomr.boemre.gov/homepg/offshore/safety/safealt/SA_184...
1 of 12/21/2012 4:17 PM