

 
1
 Safety Alert No.251                                                 Contact:  Jack Williams 
 11 July 2007                         (504) 736-1757 
 
Collapse of Pipe Supporting Coil Tubing Causes Drowning 
     
A P&A operation using a unique work platform and special procedure was being conducted on a 
toppled caisson bent almost flat by a hurricane.  A crew was rigging up coil tubing on top a 3-ft stub of 
2⅜-inch production tubing.  The BOP stack had been set atop the tubing stub and the crane was 
preparing to hoist the injection head.   
The BOP assembly suddenly swayed and toppled into the ocean as the 2⅜-in tubing buckled.  A 
technician sitting on top the BOP stack and connected to it by his fall protection harness was pulled 
into the ocean and drowned.  A complete accident account is available on the MMS website at:  
http://www.gomr.mms.gov/homepg/offshore/safety/acc_repo/accindex.html
 
The MMS investigation concluded that the 2⅜-inch tubing 
probably could not safely hold the BOP stack without auxiliary 
stabilizing support.  The MMS also concluded that:  
(1) Planning for the operation was incomplete.  It did not fully 
address problems created by the unique work platform, and did 
not include service companies in the planning process;  
(2) No JSA meeting or shift-change supervisors meeting 
addressed the special needs imposed by the unique rig-up;  
(3) No one involved in the project, including planners, 
engineers, and supervisors, recognized the potential for failure 
of the 2⅜-inch tubing supporting the BOP stack.  
The MMS recommends the Operators ensure the following: 
• Operators and contractors should be aware of the 
danger of collapse of the support base for coil tubing 
assemblies, especially during high rig-ups. 
• The Operators should review their planning process 
and ensure all details of a unique, special operation are 
reviewed by fully experienced personnel.   
• Operators should consider including contractors in the 
planning process for unique and unusual jobs. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
2
 
• Operators should ensure offshore supervisors are familiar with all aspects of planned, 
unusual operations.   
• Operators and contractors should ensure that the details of all plans are fully com
municated 
to all parties and shifts by means of JSA meetings and shift supervisor hand-off meetings. 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
—MMS—GOMR— 
www.gomr.mms.gov 