

Safety Alert No. 409                                            Contact: Bethram Ofolete 
February 8, 2021                                           Phone: (805) 384-6370 
Fall from Platform Results in a Fatality 
On December 2, 2020, an incident resulting in a fatality occurred while repairing the sub-
flooring of a platform galley. The repair required removal of all layers of floor except the 
cementitious material layer used as a moisture barrier in the original design of the 
quarter/galley flooring. A member of the repair crew stood on this layer and when another 
employee, not part of the repair crew, stepped onto the layer, the material shattered, and 
the two employees fell approximately 80 feet into the ocean. 
One employee was able to swim back to the platform. The second person was retrieved 
from the ocean by a team from the platform and CPR was administered. He was 
transported by boat to shore and taken to the hospital by ambulance, where he later died. 
Below are photographs of the work area and the cementitious material layer that were taken 
after the incident.
                               
Images of the shattered floor material 
SAFETY ALERT 

A Safety Alertis a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations 
that could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf.     
Disclaimer:BSEE’s investigationon this incidentis ongoing, as a result, BSEE has not 
yet reached a conclusionas to whether any conditionplayed a part in the cause or 
severity of the incident. 
Category: Personnel Safety 
BSEE is currently investigating this incident and may issue another Safety Alert 
containing additional recommendations once the investigation is complete. 
Currently, BSEE recommends that operators and contractors consider the 
following: 
· Check for a similar design on their facilities and inspect them for signs of potential 
danger; and,   
· Always barricade and restrict access to work areas. 
--BSEE-- 