

 
Safety Alert No. 517 
Date: June 6, 2026 
Contact: bseepublicaffairs@bsee.gov 
Phone: (800) 200-4853 
Poorly Maintained Crane Components Result in 
Multiple Injured During Personnel Transfers 
  
  
 
Background: 
The Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement investigated two incidents involving 
injuries to offshore personnel during basket transfers. In both incidents, a crane’s auxiliary 
line descended unexpectedly while personnel were being transferred between an offshore 
facility and a motor vessel.  The incidents show the importance of timely maintenance, 
correcting known deficiencies, using stop-work authority, communicating clearly during 
transfers, and planning for medical evacuations before work begins.  
Incident 1: During a personnel transfer, a crane operator was lowering a worker in a rigid-type 
personnel basket
 (Figure 1) to the deck of a motor vessel when the crane’s auxiliary line 
suddenly and uncontrollably dropped 6 to15 feet before coming to an abrupt stop 
approximately 25 feet above the water. The worker remained in the basket but suffered 
injuries to his back and leg.  
Figure 1: (Incident 1) Crane and personnel basket type involved in incident.  
Figure 2: (Incident 1) Scarring observed on the anti-two 
block.  

The injured worker needed medical evacuation by rescue stretcher/litter. Several attempts to 
evacuate the worker by helicopter failed because of miscommunication about the type of 
aircraft operating in the field and whether it could accommodate a stretcher/litter. The injured 
worker was carried to the platform helideck before personnel determined the helicopter could 
not accommodate the rescue stretcher/litter. The worker then had to be carried to the boat 
landing and transferred over water to the motor vessel. Personnel from a nearby facility were 
transported to assist with the evacuation. The evacuation by motor vessel occurred several 
hours after the incident.  
BSEE’s investigation found multiple contributing factors, including improper maintenance of 
previously identified and uncorrected deficiencies of the auxiliary boom tip sheave and 
bearing assembly; possible fouling of the auxiliary wire rope’s dead-end loop on the anti-two 
block (ATB) device (Figure 2); failure to properly document and correct previously identified 
crane deficiencies; and inadequate emergency planning and procedures.  
Incident 2: During another personnel transfer using a platform crane and personnel basket, 
three workers were injured when the crane experienced repeated uncontrolled, rapid 
descents. As the basket cleared the handrail, it suddenly dropped approximately 1 foot. 
Personnel inside the basket noticed the abnormal movement, and one passenger lost his 
footing. Personnel in the basket tried to signal the concern to the crane operator, but the 
crane operator continued lowering the basket to the motor vessel below.  
As the personnel basket approached the deck of the motor vessel, the crane operator could 
not control the descent. The basket rapidly dropped another 6 to 7 feet and landed abruptly on 
the motor vessel deck, injuring personnel. After the incident, the crane was not immediately 
taken out of service. The crane operator later attempted to use the crane’s auxiliary line for 
diesel filling operations. The auxiliary brake slipped again, causing the diesel tote tank to 
descend uncontrollably. The crane operator then took the crane out of service.  
BSEE’s investigation found that the uncontrolled descent was caused by a loss of braking 
control on the auxiliary line because the auxiliary hoist braking system needed adjustment. 
The loose brake band allowed the hoist drum to rotate under load, resulting in the 
uncontrolled descent of the personnel basket and diesel tote tank. Facility personnel did not 
invoke Stop Work Authority (SWA) after the first uncontrolled descent. 
To help prevent similar incidents, the Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement 
recommends that operators and their contractors, as appropriate, consider the 
following: 
• Follow all manufacturers recommended maintenance intervals and complete repairs 
identified by certified maintenance technicians without delay.  
• Correct previously identified crane deficiencies promptly and ensure maintenance and 
inspection records accurately reflect repair status. 

• Increase awareness of aging, worn, or neglected crane components during 
inspections, especially brake systems, sheaves, bearings, and wire ropes.  
• Train personnel to recognize brake band slippage, including early warning signs, 
periodic maintenance requirements and proper tightening practices.  
• Conduct thorough pre-use inspections before personnel transfers, including 
verification that brakes respond properly under load. 
• Verify during pre-use inspections that the auxiliary wire rope's dead-end loop is not 
fouling on the anti-two-block device. Consider installing a striker plate on the auxiliary 
line above the dead-end loop to help prevent fouling and damage to the anti-two-block 
device or wedge socket. Reinforce stop-work authority. Stop operations immediately 
after any uncontrolled or abnormal crane movement, and resume lifts only after 
qualified personnel inspect the crane and correct any deficiencies.  
• Strengthen communication protocols during personnel transfers by using designated 
channels, call and response confirmations, and pre-job briefings. Ensure personnel 
understand the importance of properly responding to signals given by personnel.  
• Verify medical evacuation capabilities and transportation resources before operations 
begin, including aircraft type, availability, landing restrictions, vessel support and 
stretcher/litter limitations  
• Conduct periodic emergency response drills so personnel are prepared for helicopter, 
vessel, and platform-based evacuations. 
 
 
Category: Personnel Safey, Personnel Transfers, Cranes/Lifting, Equipment Maintenance 
A   Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil    and gas industry of the circumstances 
surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations that could assist avoiding 
potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 