

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
Exterior Walkway Separates from Temporary Living 
Quarters, Putting Workers at Risk 
                     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement’s Gulf of America Region investigated an 
incident involving a third-floor walkway outside temporary living quarters on an offshore platform.  
Incident: Three workers were standing on an external third-floor walkway outside of their room 
located on the platform’s temporary living quarters when the walkway detached from the 
structure. Two of the workers were able to open the door and returned inside their room. The third 
worker moved away from the detached section while remaining on the walkway. After the crew 
confirmed all workers were safe, personnel secured the stairway and walkway with chain bindings 
to prevent dropped objects and further movement. 
Findings: The operator installed the living quarters as a temporary structure designed for removal 
or dismantling. (The quarters remained in service for 23 years.)  As such, the operator’s 
inspections did not account for the structure’s age or the offshore environment. Inspection 
criteria did not address corrosion, fatigue or age-related deterioration of welds. 
Walkway separated outward from temporary 
living quarters, exposing a significant gap. 
View from below of walkway shifted outward from 
temporary living quarters, revealing a significant gap. 
Safety Alert No. 513 
Date: Feb. 5, 2026 
Contact: bseepublicaffairs@bsee.gov 
Phone: (800) 200-4853  

 
 
 
Contributing Factors:  
• Design not intended for long-term service: The living quarters were built as temporary 
housing for overflow workers but remained in place for 23 years. 
• Inspections were not adequate: The operator relied on visual inspections only. Those 
inspections did not verify the condition of the tab welds connecting the walkway to the 
living quarters. 
• Insufficient structural support: The welded tabs at the walkway connection points did 
not provide enough welded surface for support. The stairway’s south side lacked support, 
which may have increased stress and contributed to the failure. 
• Marine environment and aging: Corrosion and age-related fatigue affected the tab welds 
over time. 
• Inspection management weaknesses: The operator used inspection criteria based on 
the structure’s original “temporary” intent. Visual inspections did not identify hazards 
related to structural support of the living quarters and walkways. 
 
To help prevent similar incidents in the future, BSEE recommends that operators and their 
contractors, where appropriate, consider the following:   
• Design and build temporary structures with potential long-term use in mind.  
• Update inspection programs for temporary living quarters and similar installations to 
address marine corrosion, fatigue, weld condition and structural integrity. 
• Use non-destructive testing with visual inspections, such as ultrasonic testing, to evaluate 
weld thickness and detect structural degradation.  
 
– BSEE – 
A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations that 
could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
                                                                                                                 CATEGORY: Personnel Safety; Living Quarters  