

 
Safety Alert No. 420       Contact: bseepublicaffairs@bsee.gov 
April 26, 2021                        Phone: (800) 200-4853 
 
 
Employee Injures Hand in Rotating Equipment  
 
                                      
             
 Figure 1.      Access hatch for compressor cooling fan     Figure 2.  Compressor cooling fan belt, pulley, and sheave   
 
 
On March 16, 2021, an operator, and a mechanic responded to a compressor and 
platform shut-in after hours. A vibration alarm on a compressor cooling fan caused a 
compressor package/unit to shut-in. The operator pulled the relay on the local panel to 
prevent a restart of the compressor.  A mechanic opened the access hatch (Fig 1.), then 
climbed inside the unit while the cooling fan was turning and slowing down. The mechanic 
then placed his hand on the cooling fan belt (Fig 2.) and was lifted off the unit floor and 
pulled into a sheave.  The mechanic’s hand was pinched, resulting in two fractured 
fingers.  
 
BSEE recommends that Operators and contractors consider the following: 
 
• Do not enter or access rotating equipment that is still in rotation.  Appropriate 
signage should always be posted to warn of no entry during operation.  
SAFETY ALERT 
 
 

A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations 
that could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
 
Category: Hand Injury 
• Review job safety analysis (JSA)
1
 and Lockout/Tagout (LO/TO)
2
 requirements for 
working on emergency situations and after-hours call-out work. 
• Develop safe work policies and procedures in consultation with workers, and 
provide workers with the necessary information, training, and supervision. Require 
workers to follow the developed routine and non-routine safe work practices. 
 
• All work should be conducted by fully   trained, mentored, and experienced 
personnel. 
• Consider hand safety as a line item on JSA when work involves rotating equipment 
or other high hand injury potential. 
• Refresh the Stop Work Authority (SWA)
3
  practices as it applies to after-hours call-
out work for employees that would normally be off tour or asleep.   
• Review Permits to Work requirements   for employees responding to after-hours 
call-out work.  Re-emphasize the need to follow all protocols for JSAs, Safe Work 
Practices
4
, LO/TO and SWA. 
 
 
1
 Job Safety Analysis (JSA) is a safety tool that can be used to define, and control hazards associated with a certain 
process, job, or procedure. It is a systematic examination and documentation of every task within each job to identify 
health and safety hazards, and the steps to control each task. 
2
 Lockout/tag out refers to specific practices and procedures to safe- guard workers from the unexpected 
energization or startup of machinery and equipment, or the release of hazardous energy during service or 
maintenance activities. 
3
 Stop Work Authority (SWA) provides employees and contract workers with the responsibility and obligation to stop 
work when a perceived unsafe condition or behavior may result in an unwanted event. 
4
 Safe work practices are procedures adopted for carrying out specific tasks that ensures workers' exposure to 
hazardous situations, substances, and physical agents is controlled in a safe manner. 
 
 
 