

Contact: bseepublicaffairs@bsee.gov 
Phone: (800) 200-4853 
  
Figure 1 
Figure 4  
Figure 2 Figure 3 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Commonly Found  
Ineffective Crane Stinger Hook Pin Installation:  
High potential for Injury and Equipment Damage  
                    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A high-potential near-miss recently occurred on a Gulf of Mexico energy facility. 
While using the platform crane to suspend a wireline lubricator, the pin holding the 
hook on the crane stinger backed out, resulting in the hook and lubricator falling. The 
incident caused damage to a section of the lubricator. 
 
The incident investigation found that the cotter pin at the end of the hook pin had 
sheared (Figure 1), which allowed the washer to fall and the pin to back out. When 
the pin backed out, it caused the ear on the connection to distort (Figure 2), resulting 
in the hook failing. The investigation also found there was an inadequate pin 
configuration design. The pin installed on the hook assembly had a smooth 
composition (Figure 3). The operator determined that a threaded bolt with nuts and 
keepers (Figure 4) was the proper pin design for ensuring the stinger remains 
secure throughout lifting operations.  
 
Following this event, the operator inspected their other facilities and found the same 
improper arrangement on additional cranes. 
  
 
SAFETY ALERT 
 
 
Safety Alert No. 452 
December 12, 2022 

 
 
Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators and contractors do the following:  
 
• Inspect all cranes on the facility and verify that the hook assembly has a threaded 
pin with nuts and keepers. 
 
• Retro-fit any stingers equipped with an improper stinger hook pin configuration. 
 
• Verify all crane components are in alignment with current manufacturer 
recommendations. 
 
• Add “assessment of the pin condition” into the pre-use inspection checklist, which 
should be completed before conducting lifting operations. 
 
 
 
– BSEE – 
 
 
 
 
A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations that 
could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
 
 Category: Cranes/Lifting  