

Contact: bseepublicaffairs@bsee.gov 
Phone: (800) 200-4853 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
Body Mechanics, Lifting Techniques, and Repetitive 
Motion Lead to Strain Injuries 
 
Reenactment of recent injury due to excessive force and awkward body position 
 
 
The Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) tracks occupational injuries, illnesses, and 
fatalities in the United States on an annual basis.  Sprains, strains, and tears are 
categorized as Musculoskeletal Disorders (MSD) for these statistics.  In 2020, the 
Bureau determined MSDs are a leading cause of nonfatal occupational injuries,  with 
157,290 cases attributed to strains alone. A strain occurs when a   muscle or tendon is 
stretched or torn. 
 
The number of MSD injuries is increasing in frequency throughout the Gulf of Mexico 
Region. Most of these MSDs were due to repetitive motion, overexertion, and awkward 
lifting and pulling techniques. The following are incidents BSEE reviewed that occurred 
in the last five months, for your awareness: 
 
• A mechanic using a breaker bar to loosen a nut sustained a strain injury in his 
right shoulder. 
 
• While testing blowout preventers,    an operator was in the process of closing a 
plug valve with an extension handle and sustained a strain injury in his lower 
back. 
  
 
SAFETY ALERT 
 
 
Safety Alert No. 451 
September 28, 2022  

 
• An electrician was bending over to move batteries inside a Supervisory Control 
and Data Acquisition (SCADA)  battery box and sustained a strain injury with 
muscle spasms in his lower back. 
 
• An individual reported to the medic with the complaint of feeling a "pop" behind 
his left knee while transitioning from a    stairwell onto the drilling deck. 
 
The potential for strain injuries can be reasonably anticipated as associated hazards are 
present in the offshore work environment. Steps must be taken to mitigate the risks for 
strain injuries. The two most applicable contributing factors are Ergonomics and 
Individual Risk Factors. 
 
1. Ergonomic Risk Factors include excessive force loads on the human body, 
extreme repetition, and awkward posture. To mitigate the risks associated with 
ergonomic hazards, engineering and administrative controls must be 
appropriately evaluated.  
 
2. Individual Risk Factors include poor work practices, overall health habits, 
rest and recovery, and nutrition and fitness. To mitigate the risks associated 
with individual risk factors, employees should be trained in all aspects of 
human performance and ergonomics. Additionally, implement early 
intervention processes to recognize MSD early warning signs to prevent them 
from developing into an injury. 
 
Putting ergonomic and administrative controls in place, to reduce the risks associated 
with MSD injury hazards,  is part of the company’s responsibility to provide a safe 
workplace for its people.  
 
Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators and their contractors, where 
appropriate, consider the following: 
 
•    Ensure   all workers are appropriately trained to recognize and mitigate the risks 
to    MSD injuries.  
 
•    Review OSHA’s ergonomic guidelines and implementing the Solutions to 
Control Hazards: https://www.osha.gov/ergonomics. 
 
•    Review OSHA’s Sprains and Strains in Construction/Pulling Cables video: 
https://www.osha.gov/vtools/construction/pullingcables-fnl   -eng-web.
 
  
•    Develop and implement early intervention processes to recognize early MSD 
warning signs to prevent them from developing into an injury. 
 
 

• Establish evaluation and corrective action procedures to periodically assess the 
effectiveness of the ergonomic process,  and to ensure its continuous 
improvement and long-term success. As an ergonomic process is first 
developing, assessments should include determining whether goals set for the 
ergonomic process are being met,  and to    determine the success of the 
implemented ergonomic solutions. 
 
–   BSEE – 
 
Category: Personnel Safety 
 
 
A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations that 
could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
 
 