

Contact: bseepublicaffairs@bsee.gov 
Phone: (800) 200-4853 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
Metal Obstructions Lead to Hand Injuries 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Recently reported hand injuries underscore the existing hazard of metal obstructions 
and hand placement. According to operator’s reports: 
 
• An operator needed to close a ball valve when testing the LSH on the deck 
drain sump. As the operator gripped the valve handle with his right hand, the 
edge of a metal tag became lodged between the back of his hand and the 
bridle. As he forced the valve handle down and towards the vessel, the tag 
cut the back of his hand. The injured person was not wearing protective 
gloves at the time of the incident (fig.1).  
Figure   2.   Metal   band   outlined   near   the   TMC 
connector that caused laceration to IP in incident #2.  
 
  
 
Safety Alert No. 421 
July 21, 2021  
SAFETY ALERT 
 
 
Figure 1. Reenactment of closing the ball valve from 
incident #1. The Metal tag obstruction is shown near 
the back of the hand.  
 

• As an operator was loosening a connector on a transmitter with channel 
lock pliers (fig.2), his right ring finger contacted the sharp end of a metal 
band used to secure metal tags in place on piping. This resulted in a 
laceration that required several sutures. Although he was wearing protective 
gloves at the time, they were not sufficient to prevent the injury. 
 
 
Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators and contractors consider the 
following: 
 
• Ensure that offshore personnel always wear appropriate hand protection and 
other appropriate PPE for the job task being performed. It is recommended 
that hand protection is always worn in work areas. 
• Maintain supplies of spare PPE at your facilities. Inspect all PPE and replace 
inadequate PPE before starting work. 
• Regularly verify that all valve handles can function properly and without any 
obstruction that may cause injury. 
• Continuously look for sharp edges or protrusions during regular hazard hunts. 
File down or cover sharp edges when possible or mark them to increase their 
visibility. 
• Ensure that all JSAs identify the risks involved with hand placement/safety 
and specify the PPE required for the job. Consider metal obstructions or 
nameplates as a line item on JSAs. 
• Include hand protection as a topic in the scheduled Health Safety and 
Environment (HSE) discussions and share lessons learned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations that 
could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
 
 
Category: Hand Injuries  