

Contact: bseepublicaffairs@bsee.gov 
Phone: (800) 200-4853 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
Improper Fan and Other Equipment Used in 
Hazardous (Classified) Locations During Coiled 
Tubing Operations 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Safety Alert No. 437 
April 4, 2022  
SAFETY ALERT 
 
 
Figure 2: Fan motor with hazard sticker. The sticker 
reads “Do not operate this unit in explosive or flammable 
type atmospheres.” 
Figure 1: See arrow for fan location 
 

Recently, Bureau for Safety and Environmental Enforcement (BSEE) inspectors noticed 
a fan located next to a gas buster during coiled tubing operations. The inspectors 
looked at the fan and saw that the fan was not rated for Class 1 Division 2 location as 
required for the area. The fan plug had been changed to a Class 1 Division 2 rated plug, 
but the fan itself was still rated for an unclassified area. Also, the extension cord used to 
power the fan was not adequately rated for the Class 1 Division 2 area. 
 
BSEE recommends that operators and contractors consider the following: 
 
• Reviewing Safety Alert 395 issued in September 2020. 
• Reviewing the electrical hazard classification drawings as part of a hazards 
review when planning work. 
• Before installing any new equipment, confirming it meets appropriate 
standards (e.g., API 500, 505, 14F, and 14FZ) for electrical hazard 
classification in the area where work will occur.  
o Markings should be present on the enclosures of electrical equipment 
and/or motors indicating that the equipment is approved for operation 
in hazardous (classified) locations
1
 or warning against use in areas 
where flammable or combustible gases and vapors are present. 
o Equipment rated for Class 1 Division 2 locations are used in areas 
where flammable gases and vapors may sometimes be present. They 
should not be used in areas where flammable or combustible gases 
and vapors are present during normal operations. The rating required 
may also depend on the flammable gases present (e.g., natural gas 
vs. hydrogen).  
o Refer to National Electrical Code (NEC), in Article 500, for more 
information on hazardous (classified) locations. 
o Check enclosures, wiring, and electrical connections for damage or 
improper modification. 
 
 
1
 A hazardous (classified) location is an area where the possibility of fire or explosion can be created by the presence 
of flammable or combustible gases or vapors. Electric arcs, sparks, and/or heated surfaces can be a source of 
ignition in such environments. 
A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations that 
could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
 
 
Category: Electrical Classification  