

Contact: bseepublicaffairs@bsee.gov 
Phone: (800) 200-4853 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Temporary Equipment as a Potential Source of 
Ignition on Offshore Facilities 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement field personnel have indicated a need 
for increased operator awareness when using temporary equipment (TE). Some TE 
may be a potential ignition source and can range from small items such as portable 
welding sets to large skid-mounted packages (e.g., temporary generators, air 
compressors, hydraulic power packs, well-testing equipment, process equipment, etc.)   
Recent examples of unsafe (potential ignition sources) use of TE include: 
Figure 1 -Welding Machine  
Figure 2 - Process Skid  
Figure 3 - Explosion-proof Junction Box  
SAFETY ALERT 
 
 
Safety Alert No. 449 
September 7, 2022 

• An incident of noncompliance (INC) was reported on a portable air compressor 
powered by a diesel engine not rated for a hazardous area. It was running in the 
Class 1, Division 2
1
 area next to an in-line heater treater. The heater was in 
service and treating hydrocarbons. The air compressor had the potential to ignite 
the hydrocarbons if an incident (a leak) was to occur.  
• A diesel engine-driven power pack (hydraulic supply) was used to operate the 
temporary power tongs. The power pack was in a hazardous classified area 
above the shakers and within 10 feet of the drilling fluid return flowline. The shale 
shakers and drilling fluid return flowline had the potential to contain and release 
flammable gases and vapors.  
• A portable fan was not rated for use in the Class 1, Division 2 area. It was 
operating next to the sand trap tank located under the gas buster and adjacent to 
the mud tank. The fan was connected to a power source with a non-explosion-
proof extension cord. 
 
BSEE recommends operators and contractors consider the following:  
TE should be held to the same standards as the permanent equipment it is replacing or 
supporting. When using TE, ensure that ignition sources are identified and controlled 
using proper hazard analysis, ignition prevention devices and/or Emergency Shutdown 
System (ESD)
2
. BSEE stresses, as a minimum, the following preventive measures be 
considered:  
• Inspecting and reviewing maintenance records and certificates of TE before it 
arrives at the facility. TE rated for use in hazardous classified areas may be 
unsafe if enclosures are damaged or wiring is exposed, damaged, or improperly 
modified.  
• Requesting approval from BSEE for installation and use of TE on production 
platforms that handle hydrocarbons or other Class 1 gases or vapors. Seek 
further clarification from BSEE if any TE may affect BSEE-approved drawings in 
accordance with 30 CFR 250.867 “Temporary Quarters and Temporary 
Equipment.” 
• Ensuring your Safety and Environmental Management System program 
addresses TE requirements and safely returns to normal operation following the 
removal of the TE. 
 
1
 Class 1 Division 2 locations refer to an area where ignitable concentrations of flammable gases, vapors or liquids are not likely 
to exist under normal operating conditions. In this area the gas, vapor or liquids would only be present under abnormal 
conditions (most often leaks occur under abnormal conditions). 
2
 Emergency Shutdown System (ESD) is designed to minimize the consequences of emergency situations, related to typically uncontrolled 
flooding, escape of hydrocarbons, or outbreak of fire in hydrocarbon carrying areas or areas which may otherwise be hazardous. 

• In accordance with 30 CFR 250.1917, conducting a Pre-Startup Safety Review 
3
 
before TE is implemented to prevent unforeseen hazards from causing a 
significant safety incident. 
• In accordance  with 30  CFR  250.1912, ensuring personnel follow the company’s 
Management of Change
4
 policy and procedures before installing and operating TE 
on the facility. 
• Before introducing and installing TE to the facility, completing and documenting a 
risk assessment of all the equipment involved (permanent and TE).  Implement 
mitigation of potential hazards resulting from the TE’s addition, use, failure, and 
removal.  
• Establishing safety guidelines, procedures, and training addressing the TE (e.g., 
new gas detectors, updated alarm and ESD logic diagrams, additional means of 
firefighting, etc.)   
• Ensuring the potential impacts of the TE’s installation on existing safety systems 
and barriers are identified, publicized, and coordinated, and area classification 
drawings, egress routes, etc. are updated. 
• Updating existing engineering drawings and documents to reflect all operational 
changes and informing all appropriate personnel.  
• Ensuring policies and procedures include requirements for installation, training, 
removal, testing, maintenance, and hazard control using the TE.  
• Ensuring responsibilities are assigned to individuals with clearly defined lines of 
communication between various parties (e.g., operator and contractors). 
   
 
– BSEE – 
 
 
 
 
 
3
 Pre-Startup Safety Review (PSSR) – a technical review and inspection of equipment modification prior to startup to ensure that the 
modification has been installed in accordance with the approved design standards, that procedures are in place and adequate, and that training 
of affected personnel has been completed. 
4
 A MOC is used to ensure that the environmental, health, and safety risks are carefully evaluated and controlled prior to implementing 
significant changes. The MOC process gives lessees and operators a chance to identify potential new hazards that could result from these 
changes. 
A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations that 
could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
 
 
Category: Equipment  