

Safety Alert No. 403                            Contact: Jason Mathews 
October 21, 2020                                       Phone: (504) 731-1496 
Findings from Pandemic Management Risk Based Inspections 
As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, BSEE completed a performance-based risk 
inspection (PBRI) of the pandemic management plans of select Outer Continental Shelf 
(OCS) operators. BSEE reviewed the results supplied by the operators and drew multiple 
conclusions and recommendations on pandemic mitigation barriers, screening methods, 
isolating personnel who may have contracted the disease, etc. 
As of October 20, 2020, 413 individuals were confirmed to have COVID-19 on facilities in 
the Gulf of Mexico and more were quarantined and/or evacuated due to symptoms. 
Disclaimer: The information submitted by operators is tied to a specific date of 
acquisition by BSEE. Industry’s response to COVID-19 remains very dynamic and best 
practices are still evolving as more is learned about COVID-19. 
The following summarizes findings from BSEE’s Pandemic Management PBRI: 
·
By the time of this PBRI, operators were highly engaged in providing and 
implementing effective barriers on their offshore assets to prevent the transmission 
By the time of the evaluation, many operators had developed plans specific to 
COVID-19 and actively revise them to address continuously changing conditions.   
· 
of COVID-19 between personnel; however, there was some noted lack of 
awareness on the effectiveness of personnel protective equipment(PPE).
·Each operator utilized a system to aid in mitigating the risk of infection to offshore 
personnel. While some of the operators’ screenings were inclusive of temperature 
checks and questionnaires by medical professionals, other operators included 
onshore isolation and quarantine protocols or COVID-19 test screenings (PCR 
testing and POS Antibody testing). 
·Response plans in place at the time of this PBRI were inclusive of isolation, contact 
SAFETY ALERT 

2
tracing, medical treatment of symptoms and, in some cases, evacuation. 
·
Most operators prolonged hitches by seven to 14 days to reduce the number of 
times potentially infected personnel boarded a facility. 
Most of the plans reviewed during this PBRI did not specifically address the 
minimum number of workers needed to ensure continued safe operations.  
· 
Operators also limited non
Most operators had no specific protocol to provide additional barriers for critical 
facility roles. Additionally, essential employees were treated the same as non-
essential employees in terms of at-home procedures and guidance. 
-
Even though operators requested departures and extensions through normal 
processes, there was no evidence that operators experienced delays with regulatory 
testing due to limited personnel at facilities. 
essential activities to 
Unclear guidance caused uncertainty among operators regarding a 14-day pre-
travel quarantine requirement. 
limit 
Half of the operators evaluated were not familiar with API Guidance Document 
1180, “Pandemic Planning Guide,” which provides a useful framework for creating 
a pandemic response policy. 
additional personnel from visiting or working on facilities.
·
·
·
·
·Due to medical privacy rules, most operators relied on employees to self-identify 
as high risk for severe illness from COVID-19. 
·Most operators did not conduct pandemic drills or evacuation procedures based on 
realistic scenarios to exercise elements contained in their pandemic management 
plans. 
Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators should consider the following: 
·Develop and implement a broad pandemic management plan that covers general 
infection and communicable diseases; 
·Include in plans, at minimum, measures to identify, prevent, and control contagious 
communicable diseases, periodic training on the plan, and authority of appropriate 
persons to initiate emergency response and control of contagious diseases; 
·Ensure plans include guidance on personal protective equipment and associated 
medical precautions and requirements, cleaning and decontamination protocols, 
procedures to reduce personnel interactions and to observe social distancing, self-
isolation practices, protocols for travel to and from a facility, health monitoring 
protocols, and other pertinent guidance from sources such as the Center of 
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC); 
·Evaluate the effectiveness of personal protective equipment and other mitigation 
strategies, including barriers; 
·Review the latest edition of the Offshore Operator Committee’s “COVID-19 

A Safety Alertis a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations 
that could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf.
3
Categories: Personnel Safety; PPE
Screening and Status Codes for Offshore Energy Operations” to identify and 
implement an effective framework to screen personnel traveling to offshore assets; 
·Assess existing strategies for managing personnel who may have contracted an 
infectious disease, including isolation planning, protocol to prevent ill or potentially 
infected personnel from walking throughout a facility, clear communication to 
offshore personnel, sanitization procedures, case management processes, and 
return to work protocol; 
·Identify the scope of work at specific facilities and make an assessment on the 
minimum number of personnel or positions required to continue operations safely; 
·Review personnel on-board requirements and evaluate the potential benefit of 
extending hitches, single asset crew change days, and/or reducing work to 
essential activity only; 
·Evaluate the mental health or retention of focus of personnel if offshore schedules 
are extended to reduce exposure to COVID-19; 
·Verify that personnel are knowledgeable of social distancing practices, are aware 
of disease symptoms to monitor, and understand eligibility to travel if they exhibit 
symptoms or are in close contact with infected individuals; 
·Incorporate pandemic response and evacuation procedures drills into existing 
Emergency Response and Control drills, as referenced in 30 CFR 250.1918(c). 
--BSEE-- 