U.S. Department of the Interior
Minerals Management Service
Gulf of Mexico OCS Region
Safety Alert No. 194
April 30, 2001
Contact: Frank Pausina
504-736-2560
Guardrails
Safety Alert No. 189, issued on July 19, 2000, referenced offshore accidents involving
guardrails. The Safety Alert recommended that operators (a) review the design
specifications and criteria under which guardrails on their existing facilities wereinstalled
and (b) determine if existing guardrails meet those specifications and criteria.
The Safety Alert also recommended in part that operators:
Formulate a procedure for periodically and safely inspecting the structural integrityof
guardrails.
1.
Formulate a policy on the proper use and maintenance of guardrails. The policy
should include, but not be limited to, the following directives:
2.
Never use the guardrail as an anchor point for lifting or supporting a load, or as an
anchor point for fall protection gear. (Light lifesaving devices such as buoys and
floats, as well as ESD stations, may be mounted to guardrails.)
Never lean equipment against a guardrail.
MMS recently concluded its investigation of one of the above-referenced guardrail
accidents. The accident involved the use of a guardrail as an anchor point for a
come-along. The employee using the come-along fell to his death. Safety Alert No. 189was
issued in part as a result of that accident and was also issued prior to the conclusion of the
official report, because of MMS’s concern regarding the potential for similar occurrences.
While MMS considers the above recommendations as still being appropriate, it is further
recommended, as a result of our investigation of the accident, that:
Designated Operators and their contractors review the need for a second JSA for any
activity (a) for which an initial JSA was performed and (b) whose steps have been
modified since the initial JSA had been performed.
1.
Designated Operators instruct both their onsite operator representatives and
contractors to communicate regarding any change in the steps of an activity to be
performed, especially when a JSA had been performed prior to the change.
2.
—GOMR—MMS—
Visit our Safety Information Website
Safety Alert No. 194http://www.gomr.boemre.gov/homepg/offshore/safety/safealt/SA_194...
1 of 12/21/2012 4:31 PM