

Contact: bseepublicaffairs@bsee.gov 
Phone: (800) 200-4853 
  
  
 
 
Safety Alert No. 442  
June 1, 2022 
 
 
 
Unsecured Pressurized Hoses Result in Hand Injuries 
 
 
 
 
In 2022, BSEE observed two hand injuries in the Gulf of Mexico from pressurized hoses 
during coil tubing operations. In both cases, the injured parties were not wearing proper 
impact gloves to help reduce the severity of a hand injury. Moreover, in neither incident 
was the appropriate safety device/equipment installed to keep the pressurized hose 
secured correctly in the event of a mechanical failure. 
 
Incident 1: A flexi coil hose was filled with 5.5 bbls of saltwater during a pressure test 
and tested to 10,000 psi for 10 minutes. The pressure was bled to 6,000 psi through a 
needle valve at the pump’s discharge following the successful test. Once the pressure 
was bled to 6,000 psi, the contractor began releasing pressure from a ball valve on the 
  
 
SAFETY ALERT 
 
 
Incident 2: Failed Hose Connection on Bottle Rack. 
Incident 1: The spot where the contractor’s 
right thumb was pinched between the ball 
valve and the horse head.  

upstream end of the flexi coil hose. While doing so, the flexi coil hose backlashed and 
pulled the valve from the contractor’s hand, causing the ball valve to contact the coil reel 
of the unit. The ball valve came apart when it hit the unit, and the handle contacted his 
right thumb, causing a laceration. The injured contractor stated he was wearing latex 
gloves at the time of the incident. Right before opening the valve handle, he had been 
handling hydraulic oil. 
 
Incident 2: Crewmembers were in the process of rigging up three nitrogen bottle 
racks to blowdown and purge the reel during rigging down operations. The job safety 
analysis (JSA) did not address the procedure for blowing down the reel dry and other 
associated hazards. After a successful connection to the reel, the injured crewmember 
opened the three nitrogen bottle racks to pressurize the line. He then instructed another 
crew member to open the valve at the reel to begin purging the reel. The crewmember 
partially opened the reel valve, equalizing the pressure across the valve, then opened 
the reel valve fully. After opening the reel valve, the nitrogen hose connecting the 
second bottle rack failed at the brass fitting, sending the pressurized hose whipping 
around. The injured employee was struck in the hand, resulting in two broken fingers 
and multiple lacerations. The hose then struck a second employee in the arm, causing 
bruising and swelling of the forearm. A crewmember then closed the reel valve to de-
energize the nitrogen hose to remove the hazard. The injured crew member was not 
wearing impact gloves at the time of the incident.  
 
 
Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators and contractors consider:  
 
• Emphasizing the use of properly fitting gloves (e.g., impact, chemical, or a dual glove) 
in the JSA to reduce or eliminate the severity of sustained hand injuries.  
• Establishing a policy/procedure to require employees to depress the line entirely or 
depressurize to a much lower pressure before an employee manipulates valves under 
pressure to avoid situations where a valve doesn’t cut out or is forced open when 
under stress. 
• Ensuring that during pressure testing, hoses are secured to prevent them from 
moving. Avoid stressing small threaded connections by properly supporting hoses and 
tubing. 
• Using a whip check across a pressurized hose connection to mitigate uncontrolled 
movement in the event of connection failure. 
• Ensuring work involving hoses, piping (a.k.a. chiksan), or lines under pressure should  
either have whip checks installed and tied to the deck or a block of wood connected to 
the deck to keep minimal movement when under pressure. 
 
• Verifying that all valves are in the correct position before pressurizing equipment. 

• Reviewing MSDS/SDS and the manufacturer’s recommendations to determine the 
correct PPE before handling chemicals. The materials used in some protective gloves 
may provide excellent protection against specific chemicals but may be ineffective 
against others 
• Reviewing the importance of discussing every job task and associated hazards during 
the creation of the JSA. 
• Encouraging personnel to use Stop Work Authority when equipment is unsafe or 
they discover hazards not covered in the JSA. 
• Maintaining an inventory of spare PPE for personnel who arrive at your facility with 
missing or inadequate PPE. 
– BSEE – 
 
 
 
A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations that 
could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
 
 
Category: Hand Injuries/PPE  