

 
 
Safety Alert No. 370                                Contact: Stephen Harris 
November 8, 2019                               Phone: (504) 736-3249 
 
 
 
Overcharged Battery in Non-V entilated Box  
Lead to Explosion of Remote Terminal Unit Panel 
 
On February 14, 2019, a Remote Terminal Unit (RTU) panel (used for sending gas sales 
data to shore) exploded. Projectiles from the components landed over 40 feet away. There 
were no injuries and no damage to nearby equipment.   
The investigation found evidence that a 12 Volt battery inside the panel was overcharged. 
This produced enough hydrogen gas to create an explosive mixture within the panel. The 
hydrogen gas was likely ignited by an electrical component within the panel that was not 
rated for the Area Classification in which it was installed.  
American Petroleum Institute (API) Recommended Practice (RP) 14F (incorporated by 
reference in 30 CFR 250.198) states, “[a]ll rechargeable type batteries release hydrogen 
to the atmosphere in varying degrees” ... “[a]ll rechargeable battery systems should be 
installed such that hydrogen cannot collect in sufficient quantity to create a hazard.”  
The overcharged battery was installed in a non-ventilated panel, creating a Class 1 
Division 1 location as defined in API RP 500. The components inside the panel were not 
rated for use in a Class 1 Division 1 location, so one of these non-rated components may 
have been the ignition source for the explosion.  
 
 
SAFETY ALERT 
 
 
Remote Terminal Unit Panel 
Overcharged 12 Volt Battery 

A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations 
that could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators consider the following: 
•    Ensure battery enclosures comply with API RP 500; 
•    Confirm all rechargeable battery systems are installed properly to prevent the level 
of    hydrogen collection that can create a hazard. Refer to API RP 14 F section 4 for 
protection methods; and, 
•    Verify all electrical components are rated for the area classification in which they 
are installed. Pay attention to  third party installations, especially when a third party 
may not be familiar with the facility’s Area Classification layout drawings.  
--BSEE-- 
 