

SAFETY ALERT 
Safety Alert No. 406                                                              Contact: Nicholas Fraiche 
December 1, 2020                                                                        Phone: (504) 736-7631 
Labeling, Removing, Storing and Installing Hatch Covers 
                              View of a deck on a Gulf of Mexico facility that resulted in a fatality. 
A fatality occurred on a Gulf of Mexico facility when a slickline Operator and slickline 
Helper mistakenly picked up the wrong well hatch cover. While doing so, the 
slickline Helper fell through the newly exposed hole and descended approximately 
90 feet to a lower deck, suffering fatal injuries. 
The slickline crew recently completed operations on one well and were in the 
process of rigging up equipment on a second well. While walking to the second well, 
the two slickline employees initiated a task not covered in the pre-job discussions by 
attempting to cover the well hatch to the first well. The employees mistakenly picked 
up the wrong hatch cover from inside the Well Bay Area – one that was already 
covering a hatch opening. 

2
A BSEE investigation concluded this incident occurred due to the following probable 
causes: lack of situational awareness while picking up the hatch cover; no physical 
barrier installed to prevent the removal of the hatch covers; performing activities 
outside the scope of work without an effective hazard analysis; and lack of clear 
labeling to indicate hatch cover to hatch placement. 
The investigation concluded the contributing causes of the incident were a lack of 
adequate written job procedures and the well hatch design. Additionally, the BSEE 
investigation identified a lack of job task focus as a contributing factor. Additional 
information about this incident can be found here: https://www.bsee.gov/what-we-
do/incident-investigations/offshore-incident-investigations/panel-investigation-
reports. 
BSEE makes the following recommendations to strengthen implementation of 
existing safety and environmental management systems: 
· Incorporate a facility-specific detailed procedure for the removal and installation of well 
hatch covers, as well as for the storage of well hatch covers when removed from the 
well hatch; 
· Incorporate a general lifting procedure requirement to maintain a complete visual of 
walking path when lifting and transporting objects. Incorporate a “Don’t step where you 
can’t see” requirement; 
· Incorporate at least one physical barrier for removal of the hatch covers such as a lock-
out/ tag-out safety program and/ or additional hatch cover weight to prevent 
maneuverability by personal without mechanical assistance; 
· Ensure all hatch covers are clearly labeled with the corresponding well identification; 
o Ensure labels are installed on the deck that correspond to the hatch cover labels; 
o Maintain consistent terminology for all well hatch locations in documents and 
diagrams; 
· Ensure employees receive practical training in the removal and installation of well hatch 
covers, as well as for the storage of well hatch covers when removed from the well 
hatch; 
· When removing or installing a well hatch cover, consider using a crane or other material 
handling method that limits the potential for personnel to be close to open holes; 
· Ensure contractor personnel are specifically familiarized to the area where they will 
work and are aware of any existing or potential open hole hazards that could be 
created; 

A Safety Alertis a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations that 
could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf.
Category: Equipment Installations
3
· Encourage personnel to stop work and evaluate hazards with all personnel involved in 
the job safety analysis (JSA) before considering activities outside the scope of work; 
and, 
· Incorporate a hatch cover design that allows personnel to clearly identify a hatch cover 
in a well hatch, as opposed to one laying on the deck. 
--BSEE-- 