

 
Safety Alert No. 416                                 Contact: Jason Mathews 
March 11, 2021                         Phone: (504) 731-1496 
 
 
Investigation into Grating Failure Fatality Reveals Deficiencies 
in Hazard Identification and Communication with Barriers and 
Barricades 
 
Figure 1: Un-barricaded hazardous grating located within another hazardous work zone regularly accessed by personnel 
 
On May 29,
 
2019, a night operator went missing on a production platform while 
performing routine assigned work. The operator was never located. Of the findings and 
probable causes discovered during this investigation; installation of a barricade and 
hazard communication were identified to be essential elements that could have prevented 
this fatality if executed.   
 
The investigation showed there was a communication breakdown.  Although the hazard 
of the weak grating had been known by supervisory personnel, a supervisor decided to 
delay the repair until other work was complete after placing two strands of red danger 
tape in the area.  Supervisory personnel failed to share the information regarding the 
weak grating with the operators and construction crew.  
 
Additionally, the hazardous grating was not barricaded with a rigid structure. The 
operating company conflated the definition barricade and barrier to include caution tape 
and fixed or hard structures.  The method chosen did not impede personnel from 
accessing the hazardous area. Furthermore, the area was saturated with more red 
SAFETY ALERT 
 
 

 Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the circumstances 
surrounding an accident or near miss. It also contains recommendations that should help prevent the 
recurrence of such an incident on the Outer Continental Shelf.  
2 
   Categories: General; Grating/Open Holes 
danger tape in close proximity to the hazardous grating for hot work operations on the 
deck above. Various witnesses reported being in the area of the hazardous grating during 
the hot work operations and did not notice the red danger tape that was placed to call 
attention to the hazardous grating.   
                                                                                  
Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators consider the following:  
 
• Review Safety Alert 353 in conjunction with this Safety Alert. 
• Review internal Safe Work Practices and contractor Safe Work Practices and 
ensure that operations personnel understand the requirements/expectations of 
barricades.  Effective hard barricades include rigid structures that cannot be moved 
and present an impedance to traversing an area of concern.  Operators should re-
emphasize the need to use hard barricades over caution tape.  The tape will not 
always stop personnel from entering an area with hazards. 
• Review and apply 30 CFR 250.1909 (h): Ensure that management of safety 
hazards and environmental impacts is an integral part of the design, construction, 
maintenance, operation, and monitoring of each facility. 
• Review and apply 30 CFR 250.1914 (f): You must inform your contractors of any 
known hazards at the facility they are working on including, but not limited to fires, 
explosions, slips, trips, falls, other injuries, and hazards associated with lifting 
operations. 
• Review bridging agreements at least annually and recognize any gaps in Safe 
Work Practices between contractor and operator.  
• Conduct a review of your facility to identify any open holes or surfaces that are not 
capable of supporting personnel and, if such an area or open hole is identified, 
ensure that it has been properly barricaded and/or covered.  
• Identify and mitigate additional hazards created from modified work zones during 
construction and other activities to ensure individuals do not miss or ignore barriers 
and barricades preventing access to hazardous work areas. 
• Review internal Safe Work Practices to ensure that the method to communicate 
physical hazards and hazards due to ongoing operations are not the same. For 
example, using red danger tape to mark a location with heavy corrosion while also 
using red danger tape as area access control for a task.  
• Provide signage on barricades to note if fall protection is required before entering 
and identify the known hazard(s).  