

BSEE  has seen  an  increase  in  incidents  involving  grating.   These incidents are a  result of 
personnel misjudging  grating integrity and/or  not  understanding how physical  changes to the 
grating affect integrity. In 2020 and 2021, there were multiple grating failure incidents reported 
to BSEE, including: 
·A fatality incident occurred when grating gave way (bottom image) as   personnel stood on
grating after it had been ripped (top image) and chisel gunned.
·A  man  overboard  incident  occurred when  grating shifted as    personnel walked on the
grating after the welds holding the grating to the structure were removed.
·A near-miss incident occurred when a worker walked over severely deteriorated grating,
but caught himself before falling completely through.
When  replacing grating, demolition operations such as ripping  grating  (cutting the crossbars 
along a   sheet), needle or chisel  gunning,  and removing anchor  welds  can affect a   section of 
grating’s ability to hold personnel or equipment.  The ability of deteriorated grating to hold weight 
cannot be determined visually or by prior experience, especially after demolition operations have 
begun. 
For detailed information about the fatality incidents, see BSEE panel reports 2022-01 and 2022-
02. 
Hazards When Replacing Grating 
Safety Alert No 427 January 10, 2022 
Contact: bseepublicaffairs@bsee.gov 
 Phone: (800) 200-4853 

Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators and contractors consider the following: 
·Train personnel on the dangers of insufficient grating.
oPhysical    alterations to    grating such   as ripping, needle or chisel gunning, and/or 
removing anchor welds or clips will decrease the load capacity possibly causing 
gr
ating that held persons before these actions to    become unsafe.
oWhen replacing deteriorated grating, personnel should assume the grating to    be 
unsafe to    walk
 on without fall protection.
§The integrity of deteriorated grating cannot be judged visually.
§Walking on deteriorated grating previously without incident does not 
ensure an incident will not occ
ur.
oModifications to    a   sheet of grating can affect the rated load capacity.
·Create or revise procedures for the removal and replacement of grating to    ensure 
removal preparations do not create a   more hazardous walking and working surface, 
specifically for work on large areas or entire decks.
oPr  ocedures should provide orderly steps conducive to    working on small areas of 
affected grating at a   time and identify safe working practices.
·Practice preventative maintenance rather than reactive maintenance where possible. 
Replace grating before it is    deemed hazardous.
A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations that 
could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
Category: Grating/Open Holes 