

   
 
   
 
 
Safety Alert 405                                        Contact: Jason Mathews 
November 27, 2020                               Phone: (504) 731-1496 
 
 
Blind Shear Rams Damaged after Inadvertently Closing  
on a Tool String 
 
                                               
          
 Figure 1. Actual Blind Shear Ram test setup (left)                   Figure 2. Damage to test tool assembly from BSR   
        
   and planned blind shear ram test setup (right)                           
 
In  June  2020,  an  operator,  along  with  its  drilling  contractor,  were  conducting  completion  
operations  on  a  well  in  the  Gulf  of  Mexico when  the  blind  shear  rams  (BSRs)  were  
damaged. As part of routine operations and regulatory compliance, a test of the BSRs   was 
performed in which a blowout preventer (BOP) test tool was run. During this test, the drill 
pipe was inadvertently backed off at a connection above the test assembly as the drill pipe 
was rotated to release the test tool. When the BSRs   were closed, the gallon count showed 
an abnormality, indicating an object was in its path. Upon recovery of the object, damage 
was found on the test tool as a result of an impact by the BSRs.    
 
The incident should have been reported to BSEE’s district office immediately after the BSR 
test, as required by 30 CFR 250.738(i)
, but operations continued. Days later, the operator 
notified BSEE of the incident and said that the test was not reported earlier because the 
BSRs did not shear the pipe.  
 
 
SAFETY ALERT 
 
 

   
 
A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations 
that could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
Category: Equipment 
 
Figure 3. Damage to Blind Shear Ram after closing on the test tool 
 
 
Therefore, BSEE recommends that Operators consider the following: 
 
•    Report all tests of BSRs to BSEE immediately when it   impacts an object or fails to 
close completely on activation;   
 
• In the event of a Blind Shear closure command that results in the Ram Block 
Blades contacting shearables and/or non-shearables, immediately plan to pull the 
stack in order to inspect the ram block and associated blades and fasteners; 
• Review and confirm all conditions prior to testing any components of the BOP, and 
consider a checklist to organize the verification of parameters;   
 
•    Note an incident as a significant event in a Well Activity Report (WAR) submitted to 
BSEE if the BSR impacts an object at any time; and, 
 
• Confirm all independent,  third-party requirements under 30 CFR § 250.732
 are met 
after the initial closing of a BSR, including,  but not limited to, 250.732 (a)(1)(i). 
 
--BSEE-- 
 