

 
   
 
 
 
 
Improvements Needed in Verify Production Safety System 
Training Competency   
 
Figure 1: Example of Marine Minerals Administration Production Safety System Training 
Written Test Question 
Background:  
During recent Subpart O audits, the Marine Minerals Administration’s Gulf of America Region 
identified potential concerns with Production Safety System Training, or  PSST, on the Outer 
Continental Shelf.  
The Marine Minerals Administration found offshore personnel with limited documented 
knowledge during competency assessments, computer-based training that was not monitored, 
requests to extend Production Safety System Training frequency timeframes, operators’ failures 
to evaluate contractor training, and limited procedures for verifying employee and contractor 
training needs. 
Safety Alert No. 524 
Date: August 19, 2026 
Contact: engagement@bsee.gov 
Phone: (800) 200-4853 

   
 
CATEGORY: Personnel Safety, Training 
 
In response, the Marine Minerals Administration conducted a Performance-Based Risk 
Inspection covering 16 assets operated by 11 unique operators. During the Performance-Based 
Risk Inspection, Marine Minerals Administration inspection teams administered 53 written 
tests; evaluated corrosion associated with production safety systems, skids and containment 
systems; and conducted a fire drill involving an uncontrollable fire and platform abandonment 
when operations and time allowed. The 95-question test included nine true or false questions, 
14 definition questions with a word bank, 30 device-labeling questions (Fig. 1), five practical 
questions with minimal calculations, and 37 multiple choice questions. 
As a result of the Marine Minerals Administration Performance-Based Risk Inspection, the 
Marine Minerals Administration identified several key findings: 
• Although the Performance-Based Risk Inspection covered    a limited sample of Outer 
Continental Shelf facilities and operators, the Marine Minerals Administration identified 
qualification deficiencies among personnel who   install, inspect, test, and routinely 
maintain surface and subsurface devices used to ensure safety and prevent pollution 
during offshore    oil and gas production. 
o The average test score was 80.34, with a range of 63.1 to 91.6. 
o Twenty individuals tested, or 38% of those tested, scored below 80%. 
o Five individuals tested, or 9% of those tested, scored below 70%. 
 
• Analysis of the 53 tests highlighted competency gaps in the following topics: 
o Timeframe / requirements of using pressure recording devices to create new 
operating ranges. 
o Contents and purpose of a Safety Analysis Function Evaluation Chart. 
o Surface-Controlled Subsurface Safety Valve closure times. 
o Required devices on incoming pipelines. 
o Flowline Safety Valve test tolerance. 
o Requirements of a Boarding Shutdown Valve. 
o Secondary protection from gas blowby. 
o Surface-Controlled Subsurface Safety Valve test documentation. 
o Tubing plug leakage test intervals. 
o Flowline requirements when Shut-In Tubing Pressure well exceeds Maximum 
Allowable Working Pressure. 
o Flowline Pressure Safety High setting requirements. 

   
 
CATEGORY: Personnel Safety, Training 
 
o Definition of Detectable Abnormal Operating Condition. 
o Definition of Abnormal Operating Condition. 
o Set point of PSH with Pressure Safety Valve value and operating range high point 
given  . 
o Set point of Pressure Safety Low with lowest point of operating range given. 
o With  Maximum Allowable Working Pressure and operating pressure range given 
on separator: 
 Determine maximum allowable pressure the Pressure Safety Valve can be 
set. 
 Determine highest pressure at which the flowline Pressure Safety High 
can activate and trip to avoid receiving an incident of noncompliance for 
being out of tolerance. 
 Determine the lowest pressure at which the Pressure Safety Low can 
activate and trip to avoid receiving an incident of noncompliance for 
being out of tolerance. 
 Determine highest acceptable set pressure on Pressure Safety High – if 
Pressure Safety Valve has been reset to a defined pressure. 
o Gas detection alarm system requirements. 
 
• During the Performance-Based Risk Inspection, Marine Minerals Administration 
inspection teams observed the following: 
o A production operator with less than three years of experience who had taken 
only Production Safety System refresher training and had never   completed a full 
course  . 
o A production operator with an expired    Production Safety System Training 
certification. 
o Refresher training that consisted of a limited knowledge quiz and observation 
assessment because in-person training was limited during the COVID 19 
pandemic). 
o Industry training providers who offered training test scores showed OCS 
employees who averaged 95.49 on their tests; however, the same offshore 
employees averaged 80.8 on the Marine Minerals Administration administered 
test. 
 

   
 
CATEGORY: Personnel Safety, Training 
 
• On those facilities Marine Minerals Administration was able to conduct a fire drill, the 
inspection teams identified the following: 
o Individuals who were not familiar with deploying the facilities inflatable life raft. 
o Delayed response time at an offshore facility because personnel could not hear 
the fire alarm. 
o Loudspeakers are not loud enough to be heard over compressors and other 
machinery noise. 
o Fire drill records that often did not include facility abandonment, realistic 
uncontrollable fire scenarios   ; or analysis and critique of each drill. 
  
Therefore, the Marine Minerals Administration recommends that operators and their 
contractors, where appropriate, consider the following: 
• Review their internal procedures to ensure employees and contractors maintain 
understanding of, and competency in, production safety practices.   
• Confirm personnel meet Subpart O plan requirements for  Production Safety System 
Training certification and that training records document adequate retention of the 
knowledge and skills needed to perform production safety duties. 
• Evaluate    Production Safety System Training frequency and ensure it aligns with the 
three-year  industry standard. Additionally, all Subpart O plans must specify the type, 
method(s), length, and content of the training and the method(s) used to    verify 
employee understanding and performance. 
• Review recent evaluations, such as course audits or assessments, of their    Production 
Safety System Training providers   . Assess instructor qualifications and training practices. 
• Ensure contractor training programs include periodic training and verification of 
production safety knowledge and skills. 
• Train personnel on the lifesaving equipment used on the Outer Continental Shelf facility, 
including inflatable life rafts, to  support effective emergency response and control. 
• Confirm emergency alarms, including fire, man overboard, and hydrogen sulfide alarms 
are operational, effective, and can be heard throughout the facility. 
• Review recent fire drills on Outer Continental Shelf facilities and ensure they meet 30 
CFR 250.1918 (c) and the requirements of the operator’s Safety and Environmental 
Management Systems program. 
 

   
 
CATEGORY: Personnel Safety, Training 
 
- MMA -  
A Safety Alert is a tool used by the Marine Minerals Administration to inform the offshore oil and 
gas industry of the circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains 
recommendations that could assist in avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental 
Shelf. 
As of July 10, 2026, the Department of Interior has reunified the Bureau of Ocean Energy 
Management and the Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement into the Marine 
Minerals Administration, which will oversee the responsible development of the nation’s 
offshore energy and marine mineral resources with an integrated focus on safety, 
environmental protection and efficient oversight. For more information, visit  
Transition to the Marine Minerals Administration | U.S. Department of the Interior. 