

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BSEE Identifies Compressed Gas Cylinder Hazards During                             
Risk-Based Inspections 
 
Markings and Labels on Compressed Gas Cylinder on Drilling Rig During BSEE RBI 
 
The Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement’s Gulf of America Region identified a potential risk 
involving compressed gas cylinders across the Outer Continental Shelf in 2024 and 2025. During this 
period, multiple explosions were reported to the bureau and were linked to cylinder failures. Several of 
the explosions were severe, causing injuries and damage to facilities. 
In response, the bureau conducted a performance-based risk inspection, of 20 assets, including 
production platforms and well operations across the Gulf region. These assets were operated by 13 
unique operators. 
BSEE identified several key findings: 
• Although the inspection covered a limited sample of facilities and operators on the Outer 
Continental Shelf, industry showed an overreliance on offsite, third-party contractors to ensure 
adequate integrity of compressed gas cylinders. The inspection also found a limited 
understanding of cylinder inspection programs and recharging processes.  In many cases, 
offshore personnel were not familiar with cylinder markings. 
 
Safety Alert No. 516 
Date: April 28, 2026 
Contact: bseepublicaffairs@bsee.gov 
Phone: (800) 200-4853  

• Many facilities and offshore personnel were unaware of recent safety alerts published by the 
bureau and the International Association of Drilling Contractors on the risks and the 
recommendations to lower the risks associated with compressed gas cylinders. Inspectors also 
noted that some operators followed good practices documenting the review of safety alerts by 
offshore personnel and developing preventative maintenance requirements to address the 
recommendations shared by the bureau and the association.   
 
• Bureau inspection teams found facilities without compressed gas cylinder inspection programs. 
They also found cylinders containing the same gases stored together and secured, but cylinders 
with different pressure ratings stored in the same areas without adequate consideration. Some 
cylinders could not be inspected, and some had no markings or showed corrosion. Inspectors 
also identified good practices at some facilities, including inspection programs and post-
inspection actions such as moving or rotating cylinders to allow inspection. 
 
• It was uncommon for offshore personnel to understand cylinder markings, recertification dates, 
the requirements of 49 CFR Part 173 Subpart G, or the shelf life of compressed gas contents. 
Inspection teams also found multiple compressed gas cylinders with no markings or information 
about their contents. No platform inspected used gas detectors to ensure cylinder integrity over 
time. 
 
• Most locations inspected had no compressed gas cylinder maintenance plans and relied solely 
on third-party inspections. Most operators said they had an initial acceptance visual inspection 
and a pre-use inspection; however, none of those inspections were documented or required. 
Bureau inspectors identified only a few facilities with established maintenance plans based on 
the last inspection date or a risk-based approach for fixed compresses gas cylinders.  
 
• Most operators said they did not refill compressed gas cylinders on location. Recharging 
appeared to be more common at well operations than at production facilities.  Where recharging 
took place offshore, operators used caution tape, rigid storage racks, or predetermined locations 
with a single person used as a barrier. Operators also used morning safety meetings and job 
safety analysis to communicate hazards to offshore personnel during recharging operations. 
 
• The majority the operators inspected did not have a recharging system, requirements or 
responsibility on location. Operators said they relied on third-party vendors to recharge their 
cylinders onshore or offshore. At facilities where recharging operations took place, they 
implemented systems that could not charge at a higher pressure of their cylinders; pressure 
safety valves are inspected and tested every 30 months; and pressure safety valves are set below 
the maximum allowable working pressure of the compressed gas cylinders. 
 
• Operators were generally unaware of Department of Transportation special permits, and largely 
assumed their third-party vendors were compliant with Department of Transportation standards. 
 
• Inspection teams found multiple cylinder racks in unprotected areas that did not allow for proper 
drainage, increasing long-term exposure to corrosive elements. 
 
• Operator and contract personnel were not trained on how to inspect compressed gas cylinders, 
the risk associated with them, or best practices to prevent rupture incidents 

Therefore, to help prevent similar incidents in the future, the Bureau of Safety and Environmental 
Enforcement recommends that operators and their contractors, where appropriate, consider the 
following:  
• Review internal procedures for sharing safety alerts with offshore personnel and take corrective 
action on recommendations from the bureau to prevent the recurrence of similar incidents on the 
Outer Continental Shelf.   
• Ensure all compressed gas cylinders are stored by contents and pressure; be easily inspectable; 
have valve caps on when not in use and secured within a rack with chains, straps, or secured to a 
wall or support. 
 
• Inspect all cylinders on their platform and validate that every compressed gas cylinder is properly 
labeled with clear, durable content identification via stenciling or labels. Every cylinder should 
have marking requirements that include legible content names, hazard warnings, and Department 
of Transportation info. Damaged labels should be marked as "Contents Unknown". Operators 
should ensure their offshore personnel have a full understanding of cylinder labels, markings and 
recertification dates. 
• Working with third party vendors and establish the best inspection criteria for compressed gas 
cylinders while they are located on shelf facilities. These inspections should be conducted by 
qualified personnel and documented. Documentation should include the date of the inspection or 
test; include the name and position, and the signature of the person who performed the inspection 
or test; include the serial number or other identifier of the equipment on which the inspection or 
test was performed; include a description of the inspection or test performed; and the results of 
the inspection test. 
• If any recharging operations take place offshore, develop written procedures to ensure safe 
operations. Operators should not allow one person to perform recharging alone. Personnel should 
use the correct personal protective equipment, open valves slowly, secure cylinders, keep ignition 
sources away, conduct leak checks, and ensure all fittings are compatible with the gas being used 
to prevent explosions, leaks and injuries from high-pressure gas. 
• Before any pre-charge operations on an offshore facility, operators should confirm overpressure 
protection on a pump for gas cylinders, visually inspect the pressure relief valve for damage, test 
its function by letting the pump build pressure until the relief value opens, and check that the 
pressure switch setting is lower than the relief vale’s set point, ensuring a multi-layered safety 
system with proper settings below the tank's maximum limits. 
 
• Work with their third-party vendors to ensure all racks that are sent to the offshore facilities meet 
the requirements of the Department of Transportation and have all required special permits when 
applicable. 
 
• Review all cylinder racks on their facilities and determine if all cylinders are on a free draining base 
to minimize corrosion. If a rack is identified to not be drainage free, operators and contractors 
should find ways to mitigate corrosion to the cylinder through frequent inspections or moving the 
racks to covered areas. 
 

• Review Safety and Environmental Management System training element and ensure it addresses 
compressed gas cylinder training regulations, especially those tied to  Occupational Safety and 
Health Administration’s 29 CFR 1910.101, which mandates that employers train all personnel on 
safe handling, storage, and use to mitigate hazards like explosions, fires, and toxic exposures, 
covering proper personal protective equipment, valve handling, leak testing, and cylinder securing, 
with specific training needed for different gas types. 
 
 
– BSEE – 
A Safety Alert is a tool used by the Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement to inform the 
offshore oil and gas industry of the circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also 
contains recommendations that could assist in avoiding potential incidents on the Outer 
Continental Shelf.  
CATEGORY: Personnel Safety, Explosion 