

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MMS 
U.S. Department of the Interior 
Minerals Management Service 
 Gulf of Mexico OCS Region
 Safety 
Alert 
Safety Alert No. 264 Contact:  Alex Alvarado 
July 7, 2008 (504) 736 2547 
Dynamic Pipeline Riser Inspection, Maintenance, and Monitoring 
Records on OCS Floating Facilities 
In 2004, visual inspections performed on several steel catenary riser flexible joints in the Gulf of 
Mexico found damages to the elastomeric seal area near the rotating ball that prompted the 
replacement of four (4) flexible joints following a failure on a flexible joint that resulted in a 
small oil spill. 
In 2008, a natural gas leak occurred from a steel catenary export riser in the Gulf of Mexico.  
Through visual inspection by divers, it was determined that the flexible joint on the riser was the 
source of the leak.   A root cause analysis has not been completed to determine the cause of the 
failure.  
The MMS’s statutory role in pipeline safety and pollution prevention requires the agency to 
monitor dynamic riser performance and failures, and when necessary, take action to prevent this 
type of incident through regulatory actions and this Safety Alert. 
The Minerals Management Service (MMS) strongly urges lessees and operators and pipeline 
Right-of-way holders that have pipelines with dynamic risers (such as steel catenary risers on 
offshore floating production facilities) to perform regular maintenance and inspections, monitor 
the environmental conditions, and maintain records of these activities.  A failure on a dynamic 
riser could pose a potentially significant impact to safety, the environment, and energy supply.  It 
is essential that you perform any necessary actions needed to ensure the safety and reliability of 
these critical components.  
The national consensus standard for dynamic risers, American Petroleum Institute 
Recommended Practice 2RD, is currently under revision.  The revised version will include 
guidance on integrity management programs for dynamic risers.  Upon completion, MMS will 
consider adopting this standard into its regulations for OCS pipelines.      
--MMS--GOMR--
www.gomr.mms.gov 