http://www.gomr.boemre.gov/homepg/offshore/safety/safealt/SA_172... 
U.S.    Department of the Interior 
Minerals Management Service  
Gulf of Mexico OCS Region  
Notice No. 172 
August 27, 1997 
Personnel Overexposed to Carbon Monoxide 
Recently, while sleeping in their living quarters, personnel on a platform were exposed to levels of carbon 
monoxide (CO) high enough to cause them to exhibit symptoms of overexposure. One employee was 
hospitalized and treated for CO poisoning. The high concentration level of CO occurred when wind conditions 
changed and directed exhaust from diesel and natural gas engines into the quarters' ventilation system. 
Following the incident, the operator found other platforms where unacceptable levels of CO were experienced. 
Your attention is directed to 29 CFR Part 1910, Subpart Z, in which the Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration (OSHA) has established Standards for employee exposure to hazardous substances, including 
CO. 
Therefore, from this information, the following are recommended: 
1.  Tests be conducted in high-risk areas on existing manned facilities to determine, through the use of continuous 
CO-detection monitors, if the exposure tolerances listed in the above referenced OSHA regulations are being 
exceeded or are in danger of being exceeded. 
2.  If the above referenced tests reveal that a danger to overexposure exists, the following measures are 
suggested as appropriate: 
a.  Exhaust from internal combustion and fired equipment be rerouted in a manner not to overexpose personnel to 
CO, and/or 
b.  Ventilation system air intakes be located in areas not susceptible to hazardous substances, and/or 
c.  Permanent monitors and alarms be installed for the purpose of alerting personnel of the need to evacuate the 
area should the exposure tolerances be exceeded or dangerously approached, and/or 
d.  Buildings be inspected for sources of CO infiltration and, when needed, building integrity be improved. 
3.  The design of all new manned facilities should consider the potential for personnel exposure to CO. 
--MMS--GOMR-- 
MMS Internet Homepage: http://www.mms.gov  
1 of 1 2/21/2012 4:12 PM