

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MMS 
U.S. Department of the Interior 
Minerals Management Service 
 Gulf of Mexico OCS Region
 Safety 
Alert 
Safety Alert No. 268 	Contact:  Glynn T. Breaux 
2 October 2008 	(504) 736 2560 
Traveling Block Assembly Strikes Crown Block 
On 4 August 2008, after pulling approximately 30 stands in high/high gear and with a 150,000 
pound  drill  string  weight,  a  barge  rig’s  Traveling  Block  Assembly  (TBA)  struck  the  Crown 
Block. The Crown-O-Matic (COM) was activated, but due to the speed and momentum of the 
TBA the activation of the COM was not enough to stop the TBA from striking the Crown Block. 
All rig operations were shut down due to the damage ($56,500) of the TBA and Crown Block, 
with no report of injury or pollution.  
A  MMS  investigation  into  this  accident  indicated  that  the  failure  was  caused  by  multiple 
management oversight issues and improper use of the rig’s top drive gear usage as follows: 
•	 There was a sense of urgency by all parties to pull out of the hole (POOH) and trip back 
in the hole due to an approaching tropical storm; 
•	 A break down in communication between the Operator and Rig Contractor personnel led 
to the Driller not following the Rig Contractor’s standard policy for this rig of not POOH 
in high/high gear; 
•	 Due to the speed and momentum of the TBA  while  POOH,  the  COM  was  unable  to 
prevent the TBA from striking the crown sills; 
•	 A pre-job rig safety meeting conducted prior to POOH required pinging of the 3
rd
 joint to 
alert the Driller of joint count and spacing as it came through the rotary table (the pinging 
procedure is conducted by the rig floor hands as they are counting each tool joint as it 
passes through the rotary table). Due to a break down in communication between the 
Driller  and  rig  floor  hands,  no  one  person  was  designated  to  perform  the  pinging 
operation; 
•	 Although the Driller had seven (7) years of drilling experience, three (3) months of that 
with the Rig Contractor, the Driller had never POOH in high/high gear on this rig. 
Therefore, MMS recommends the following: 
•	 Prior  to  deviating  from  any  standard  operating  procedure,  the  Operator  and  Rig 
Contractor should conduct a hazard analysis to identify and evaluate potential hazards; 

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
              
 
 
 
•	 Drilling Rigs originally installed with a Power Swivel/Kelly drilling system that have 
been upgraded to a Top Drive drilling system should ensure that the distance from the top 
of the TBA, once the COM is activated, is sufficient to allow for the TBA to stop before 
striking the Crown Block; 
•	 Rig  Contractors  should  research  and  consider  installing  a  secondary  Crown  Block 
detection system; 
•	 To encourage safety awareness, the distance from the top of the TBA, once the COM is 
activated, to the Crown Block should be posted in the Driller’s shack; 
•	 Driller’s should be cautioned about pulling pipe in high/high gear;  
•	 The Driller is ultimately responsible for counting tool joints, and should not rely solely 
on pinging of the pipe to be alerted that a certain joint has cleared the rotary. Should the 
Driller utilize the pinging method, the Driller should explain to the rig floor hands the 
importance  and  reason  for  counting  tool  joints  and  pinging  as  necessary.  In  addition, 
when one floor hand is designated to ping the pipe, a designee should always be present 
on the rig floor. 
--MMS--GOMR--
www.gomr.mms.gov 