Safety Alert No. 207-Rentqal Crane Bracing Failure in Fatalityhttp://www.gomr.boemre.gov/homepg/offshore/safety/safealt/SA_207...
U.S. Department of the Interior
Minerals Management Service
Gulf of Mexico OCS Region
Safety Alert No. 207Contact: Jack Williams
De
cember 18, 2002(504) 731-3012
Rental Crane Bracing Failure Results in Fatality
Recently, an operator hired a construction/rental crane contractor to remove an 18,000-lb.
flare boom from a platform. The rental crane was installed and the old flare boom was cut
loose. During the swinging of the load to begin lowering it onto the boat, the base of the
east-west brace attaching the rental crane to the platform failed. This caused the crane to
be torn suddenly from the platform and pulled overboard into the Gulf of Mexico. The
movement of the crane overboard caused the death of a crewmember who was in the path
of the falling crane.
This Safety Alert serves as a follow-up toSafety Alert No. 202, issued on June 20, 2002.
Cause
1.The failure of the crane brace was directly caused by a fault in the fundamental
design of the way the crane was attached to the platform. The crane was held in
place by two braces welded to the platform, one oriented east-west and one north-
south. When attaching the east-west crane brace to the platform, the contractor first
welded the brace to a small I-beam. Then, the I-beam was welded to the platform
skid beam in such a manner that the I-beam/brace attachment was outboard of the
I-beam/skid beam weld and the I-beam ends were unsupported. This created a
cantilever effect that multiplied the forces on the I-beam to the point that the I-beam
failed when exposed to the full load of the lift.
2.The deficient fundamental design was allowed because of organizational failures as
follows:
No engineering calculations were required or employed by the Operator or
Contractor to ensure the adequacy of the attachment design;
No written procedure for installing the crane was required or employed by the
Operator or Contractor to ensure competent review of field modifications of
standard installation procedures.
3. No written Job Safety Analysis (JSA) or Job Hazard Analysis (JHA) was required or
created by the Operator or Contractor. A JSA analysis of the operation could
reasonably have been expected to have identified the hazard of positioning a
crewmember within a zone that would place him at risk in the event of a crane failure.
1 of 22/21/2012 4:37 PM

4. The load testing of the crane prior to conducting the operation did not reveal the
structural flaws of the installation. This failure indicates the standard method for load
testing cranes of this type with the boom oriented only in one direction does not
provide a true indication of the ability of the crane to perform safely the full range of
motion required to complete a job.
5. The supervisors overseeing the operation failed to recognize the structural deficiency
of the installation. The supervisor installing the crane failed to recognize that the
cantilever method of using an I-beam as the base for the E-W brace was significantly
different from other methods of using an I-beam as a connector. This likely caused a
failure to discuss and review the installation method with company management.
Possibly Contributing to the Failure
6.Possibly contributing to the fatal accident was the lack of a formal, written procedure
provided by the Contractor or Operator that defined the steps and checkpoints of the
construction job as a whole.
7.Verbal communication misunderstandings between the supervisors and on-shore
management also possibly contributed to the accident.
Recommendations to Operators
The MMS recommends to the operators that they thoroughly review the engineering of
attaching any rental crane to a structure. The MMS also recommends to the operators that
they thoroughly prepare a written procedure that defines the circumstances requiring
supervisor, management or engineering review of operations during the course of
construction activities.  The MMS recommends that formal JSA/JHA’s be employed to
identify risks to personnel prior to major construction activities.
For details of the accident, seeOCS Report MMS 2002-076. Copies of the report may be
obtained from the MMS Public Information Office located at 1201 Elmwood Park Boulevard,
New Orleans, Louisiana 70123 (1-800-200-GULF or local 504-736-2519).
—MMS—GOMR—
ww
w.gomr.mms.gov
Visit our Safety Information Website
Safety Alert No. 207-Rentqal Crane Bracing Failure in Fatalityhttp://www.gomr.boemre.gov/homepg/offshore/safety/safealt/SA_207...
2 of 22/21/2012 4:37 PM