

 
 
U.S. Department of the Interior 
Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, 
Regulation and Enforcement 
Gulf of Mexico OCS Region  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BOEMRE 
Safety 
Alert 
 Blowout Preventer Automatic Mode (Deadman) Activation 
Safety Alert No. 294 Contact:  Lance Labiche 
April 14, 2011 (504) 736-2433 
Following the Deepwater Horizon incident in April 2010, BOEMRE promulgated the “Increased 
Safety Measures” rule with an effective date of October 14, 2010.  This rule, in part, requires 
operators 
to submit (as part of the drilling permit process) schematic drawings of all blowout 
preventer equipment including all control systems and pods.  This rule further requires operators 
to conduct a test of the automatic mode (deadman) activation system during the initial BOP test 
on the seafloor.  During the Bureau’s review process of one of the drilling permits, it was 
determined through discussions with an operator that in the event of a deadman activation, the 
blind shear ram may open up immediately upon re-establishing power to the BOP stack.   
In light of this discovery, BOEMRE recommends that operators and drilling contractors review 
their deadman activation procedures and control logic to ensure that the inadvertent opening of 
the blind shear does not occur when power is re-established to the BOP stack.  One operator has 
presented a possible mitigation procedure that places the blind shear ram opening function in the 
“block” position prior to re-establishing power to the stack.   
Further, BOEMRE will be reviewing all deadman testing procedures and control logic as part of 
the permit approval process to ensure that this recommendation has been taken into consideration 
and addressed.  Failure to address this issue and recommendation may delay the permit approval.  
For further information, please direct all calls to the individual identified above. 
--BOEMRE--GOMR--
www.gomr.boemre.gov 
A Safety Alert is a tool used by BOEMRE to inform the offshore oil and 
gas industry of the circumstances surrounding an accident or a near miss. It 
also contains recommendations that should help prevent the recurrence of 
such an incident on the Outer Continental Shelf. 