

 
SAFETY ALERT 
Contact: bseepublicaffairs@bsee.gov 
Phone: (800) 200-4853 
  
  
 
 
 
BSEE Issues Recommendations for Safely Approaching, 
Entering and Exiting a   Helicopter on Offshore Helidecks 
 
  
A recent incident occurring on an offshore facility’s helideck during a routine crew 
change brought to light critical safety concerns regarding safe procedures for 
approaching, entering, and exiting helicopters. The management of helideck crews and 
passengers is a safety-critical operation that could lead to severe injuries or fatalities if 
not executed correctly. 
 
The incident resulted from a combination of procedural lapses and behavioral failures 
that had the potential for catastrophic consequences. In this alarming near-miss event, 
a helicopter was stationed on the facility’s helideck and a crew member approached the 
aircraft from the rear, entering the rotor arc area before the rotor blades had come to a 
complete stop. This unsafe action posed a significant threat to the safety of all 
personnel involved. A n offshore helideck assistant repeated the unsafe behavior by 
approaching the helicopter from the rear, entering the vicinity of the tail rotor, and 
positioning themselves within the main rotor’s danger zone immediately after the 
helicopter had landed on the facility’s helideck. These incidents occurred while the 
  
 
Safety Alert No. 474 
Nov.9, 2023 
Figure 1: Offshore facility with helideck  
Figure 2: Helicopter Safe Zones (Not aircraft specific)
 

 
 
helicopter’s rotors were still in motion and before the pilot had signaled clearance for 
personnel to approach. 
 
Upon recognizing the incursion, the helicopter’s air crew took immediate action by 
alerting the pilot, who was already in the process of engaging the rotor brakes.  
Subsequently, the air crew invoked “Stop Work Authority”
1
 and took proactive steps to 
ensure the helideck crew fully understood the correct procedure for entering and exiting 
the helideck and safely approaching or departing from helicopters. 
 
The   incident underscores the importance of adhering to established safety protocols 
during helicopter operations on offshore facilities. Please refer to the recommendations 
and references provided below for comprehensive guidance on ensuring the safety of 
all personnel involved in offshore helicopter operations. (Reference: U.S. Department of 
the Interior Safety Communique (SAFECOM) 23-0234, 
https://www.safecom.gov/safecom/23-0234
). 
 
Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators and their contractors, where 
appropriate, consider the following:     
 
• Not entering the helideck until the helicopter blades have completely 
stopped, the anti-collision lights have been turned off, and/or a 
"thumbs-up" signal has been received by the pilot. 
 
• Receiving clear confirmation from the pilot, either through hand signals 
or radio communications, prior to approaching the helicopter or 
installing handrails (if the facility is so equipped). 
  
• Ensuring helideck crew members use the designated safe entry zones 
corresponding to the specific helicopter type during crew access and 
egress. These zones are established for safety reasons, considering 
the unique characteristics of each aircraft. 
  
• Ensuring personnel are familiar with and understand helicopter loading 
and unloading policies and procedures to prevent incidents from 
occurring on the helideck. 
 
1
 Stop work authority (SWA) is a Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement (BSEE) program (30 
CFR 250.1930) that gives workers and contractors the authority and responsibility to stop work if they 
observe unsafe conditions or behaviors on the jobsite. 
 

 
 
• Ensuring safety critical operations are well planned and proper controls 
are in place to ensure flawless execution of the plan. 
 
• Reviewing the policy guidelines in the company Health, Safety and 
Environment (HSE) manual and including area specific regulatory 
requirements and recommended practices. 
 
• Critiquing operations for signs of weakness or noncompliance, and if 
any are identified, implementing specific actions to correct them. 
 
• Not leaving safety to chance by ensuring the development and 
implementation of a facility specific helicopter operations procedure.   
 
 
Additionally, BSEE reminds industry of the following information and aids to 
minimize risks to passengers, helideck crews, and others involved in offshore 
helideck operations: 
 
• International Association of Drilling Contractors (IADC) Safety Alert 
2005-26 Safe Helicopter Operations. 
• HSAC RP 165 Air Operator Guidelines for Offshore Helicopter 
Operations – 1st Edition. See section15. Passenger Control.  
• HSAC RP 1988-1 Passenger Management on and About Heliport 
Facilities. 
• Video: Helideck Management (From BP per OPITO Helideck 
Operations Training Standards). 
• Video: Offshore Helideck Operations example of pilot signal. 
• Recommended training: OPITO Helicopter Operations Initial Training 
(HOIT) (7040). This course is designed for offshore personnel who are 
to be appointed to the role of an Offshore Helicopter Landing Officer 
(HLO) and/or Offshore Helideck Assistant (HDA). 
 
– BSEE – 
 
 
A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a    potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations that 
could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
 
 
Category: Component Failure, Pipe Handling, Well Operations, Structural, Fire 