

 
SAFETY ALERT 
Contact: bseepublicaffairs@bsee.gov 
Phone: (800) 200-4853 
  
 
 
 
BSEE Risk Based Inspection Identifies  
Welding and Burning Hazards 
In September 2023, the Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement (BSEE) 
carried out Performance-Based Risk Inspections (PBRIs) f  or 22 production and well 
operation sites in the Gulf of Mexico. An analysis of compliance and incident data since 
2022 uncovered multiple high potential fires associated with welding and burning 
operations leading to these on-site targeted inspections of 13 production facilities and 
nine well operation facilities operated by 11 distinct operators. An evaluation of those 
inspections identified several critical issues requiring attention to ensure the safety and 
integrity of ongoing operations.   
 
The PBRIs   revealed instances where fire protection barriers (e.g., tarps, curtains, and 
blankets)  were either inadequately placed or damaged, posing a risk to the safety of 
welding and burning operations.  
 
In one incident,  evidence suggests hot slag from a cutting torch pierced the underside 
blanket barrier of the living quarters building. The residual heat likely caused the wood 
subfloor to ignite (Figure).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Safety Alert No. 482 
April 4, 2024 
Figure: Fire spread to the living quarters following 
the removal of the heliport substructural frame 
using cutting torches.  

 
 
The PBRIs identified the following concerns:  
• Hot work was being conducted in areas located within 35 feet of equipment 
containing hydrocarbons. 
• Inadequate housekeeping practices were observed, with flammable sources like 
cardboard boxes found within 35 feet of hot work areas, posing an additional risk 
to safety.   
• Tools for prevention, such as fire extinguishers and portable gas detectors, were 
not properly identified as necessary. 
• Operations were taking place without an approved Safe Welding Plan, indicating 
a need for comprehensive safety measures and planning.    
• Offshore personnel were not following safe welding and hot work procedures. For 
example, one procedure requires the designated person-in-charge to    personally 
verify the individual performing the burning had been trained to safely operate the 
oxygen/acetylene burning equipment. BSEE found at least one instance of this 
not having occurred.  
• Frequency of training for hot work and/or welding was inconsistent. BSEE was 
unable to determine from the Safe Welding Plans or Safety and Environmental 
Management System (SEMS) Training Element if   operators required individuals 
serving as welders to be trained and qualified to the appropriate industry 
standards and codes (e.g., American National Standards Institute, American 
Welding Society, American Society of Mechanical Engineers etc.), relative to the 
specific type of hot work tasks being performed. 
• Hot work permits and Job Safety Analyses (JSAs)   listed the same person to 
perform fire watch and perform the hot work.  
 
BSEE recommends that operators and their contractors, where appropriate, 
consider doing the following: 
• Taking all necessary precautions to control, remove, or otherwise correct any 
hazardous oil and gas accumulation or other safety, health, or fire hazard.   
• Inspecting the rating, current condition, and placement of fire protection 
barriers to mitigate the potential risk caused by hot work, including personal 
protective equipment. 
• Reviewing and mitigating any hazards associated with welding and burning 
operations, which warrant a heightened level of planning specific to the task’s 
risk. 
• Reviewing training and competency requirements for hot work, ensuring 
these meet industry standards.  

 
 
• Ensuring employees can understand and perform their jobs in a safe and 
environmentally sound manner. 
• Ensuring all hot work operations are inspected by the person in charge prior 
to commencement of work and ensuring adequate supervision and fire 
watches are in place throughout the duration of the work. 
• Adhering to  all applicable planning and procedures for safe welding and hot 
work.  
• Requiring all operations and contract personnel attend and participate in pre-
job JSA meetings and ensuring the supervisors of all phases of the work 
know and understand the complete scope of the job. 
• Ensuring compliance with 30 CFR, Section 250.46, Safe and Workmanlike 
Operations.  
 
PBRIs are a component of BSEE’s Risk‐Based Inspection (RBI) Program and 
performed in addition to BSEE’s annual inspection program.  The RBI Program  
uses a systematic approach, employing both a quantitative risk model as well as 
subjective performance and risk-related intelligence information, to identify higher‐
risk facilities on which to focus inspections and resources. For PBRIs, BSEE 
specialists review key performance indicators, like compliance and incident data, to 
identify any trends indicating risk associated with widely-employed procedures or 
equipment that warrant the attention of focused inspections. PBRIs are narrow in 
focus (for example: gas releases; lifting incidents; compressor fires; etc.), and cover 
multiple facilities, operators, and districts in a two-to-three-day window. The findings 
are used to inform the entire industry and thereby have far-reaching effects leading 
to continuous improvement. 
 
Learn more here: Risk Based Inspection Program | Bureau of Safety and 
Environmental Enforcement (bsee.gov) 
 
– BSEE – 
 
 
 
A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations that 
could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
 
 
Category: Personnel Safety, Fire 