

 Safety Alert No. 231                                       Contact: GlennWoltman   
31 May 2005                            (504) 736-2438 
  
 
Human Engineering Factors Result in Increasing Number of Riser Disconnects  
     
A significant number of accidental riser disconnects have been experienced in deepwater operations 
during the last five years.  Each event had the potential for causing serious well-control issues.   
 
After the first incident in 2000, MMS issued a Notice to Lessees and Operators (NTL),  
No. 2000-G07, which clarified 30 CFR 250.107 (a) and 250.400 (July 2002) and prescribed measures 
to prevent the accidental disconnect of the lower marine drilling risers from floating drilling rigs.  The 
NTL addressed ergonomic measures to prevent human error and offered measures focused on 
technological improvements.      
 
Since the issuance of this NTL, nine accidental drilling riser disconnects and one accidental 
production riser disconnect have occurred.  Two riser disconnects have occurred thus far in 2005.  
Investigation results indicate human error as the cause for both incidents.     
 
Human error contributed to over 50 percent of the total number of events.  Failure to implement the 
written operating procedures to function-test the lower marine riser package (LMRP) and the BOP 
stack while in the moon pool or prior to water entry has resulted in many of these events.  Historical 
information is provided in the attached table.   
 
The MMS recommends that you review NTL No. 2000-G07, which states in part the following: 
 
a. Lock out any LMRP disconnect that is not part of a sequential disconnect process before the 
BOP/LMRP enters the water (ensuring that a well is secured by blind or blind-shear rams 
before the riser disconnects). 
b. Ensure that the sequential LMRP disconnect process, including the isolation of the wellbore, 
is designed so that the LMRP can be disconnected only as the result of a deliberate act. 
c. Ensure that human engineering measures such as labeling the panel button are clearly 
distinguishable from other functions, and fit LMRP and wellhead connector functions with 
securable protective covers.   
d. Remove confusing metal tags temporarily used to identify functions, as they may have been 
incorrectly placed.  Rely on stamped receptacle identifications to ensure that the control 
circuits on the wellhead or LMRP connectors have not been disturbed.  The subsea engineer 
must first ensure that proper Subsea Function Test Checklist Procedures are in place, and then 
observe, verify, and document all function testing of the BOP’s in the moon pool.       
e. During BOP function and pressure testing on the stump, all functions should be operated 
through the test stinger to confirm the hoses are installed appropriately on both pod 
receptacles. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
MONTH/YEAR   BLOCK/LEASEEVENT
1Jan-00MC 822Human Error-Inadvertent Riser Disconnect
Plan to test blind shear rams, but pushed wrong button, disconnecting LMRP
2Feb-00MC 538Human Error-Inadvertent LMRP disconnect and blowout event 
Inadvertent LMRP disconnect from BOP while installing lock-out device
3Jun-00GC 743Equipment Malfunction-Inadvertent Riser Disconnect while logging
PLC program card failure in BOP control system resulting in low 24-volt DC power supply 
Voltage interuption interpretated by PLC and EDS sequence initiated
4Jan-01EB 599Equipment Failure-Emergency Riser Disconnect  
Lost power and rig drifted off location; activated emergency
disconnect of LMRP when riser angle reached 5 deg
5Jun-01GC 202Human Error-Production riser connector inadvertently released 
Procedure to retrieve riser running tool unclear.  Adequate details to guide operator through process not available.  
6Jun-01GC 1001Equipment Failure-Dynamic Position Failure-Drift Off-Emergency Riser Disconnect
Loose wiring on two of the DP panels; loss of power to thrusters
7May-03MC 822Equipment Failure-Parted Riser  
Failure initiated in one of six inserts in female connector of one 
joint.  Cracks inside shoulder area allowed 
propagation of hydrogen embrittlement, leading to environmentally assisted cracking and ultimate failure.  
Failure of first insert transferred loads to ad
jacent inserts and bolts, which subsequently failed
Emergency systems activated closing casing shear RAMS and lower shear RAMS
8Jun-03MC 725Human Error-Controlled Emergency Disconnect-Drift Off 
Operator error for maintaining current on beam of ship, rather than manuvering heading to bow.  
 Not following the DP Model System Selected heading caused drift off.
Insufficient power on rig did not allow operator to correct heading to maintain station. 
9Apr-04GC 653Weather Related-Emergency Disconnect Procedure Initiated
Dynamic Position Operator unable to maintain heading, turns difficult due to 60 knot winds fluctuating.  
Ship drifted off location until Red Dynamic Position watch circle reached at 283 feet off location
10Mar-05EW 965Human Error-Riser Disconnect-Hydraulic hoses for blue pod latch and unlatch functions cross connected.  
Blue pod and yellow pod competing with each other during function testings.  
11Mar-05GC 157Human Error-Inadvertent Riser Disconnect 
Incorrect hydraulic connections on yellow control pod
1Weather-Related (Apr 04)
6Human Engineering (Jan 00, Feb 00, June 01, June 03, Mar 05, Mar 05)
4Equipment-Related (June 00, Jan 01, June 01, May 03)
Historical Subsea Riser Disconnects from January 2000 to Present
Summary of Events By Root Cause
 
 
 
 