

Safety Alert No. 381                           Contact: Jason Mathews 
May 7, 2020                              Phone: (504) 731-1496 
Common Operator Deficiencies Discovered by  
Safety Environmental Management System (SEMS) Audits 
In accordance with 30 CFR 250.1920(b)(5), lessees on the Outer Continental Shelf (OCS) 
are required to have their SEMS programs audited by an accredited Audit Service Provider 
(ASP) within 2    years of starting operations and every 3    years thereafter. BSEE Gulf of 
Mexico Region’s Office of Safety Management (OSM) has analyzed all SEMS audit results 
from 41 operators for the period from 11/16/2016 to 11/15/2019. Below is a list of the most 
common audit findings for each of the 17 SEMS Elements that were observed by accredited 
ASPs. 
1. General – There is no formal documented process established for an internal 
annual review of the SEMS program to determine that it continues to be suitable, 
adequate, and effective. 
2. Safety and Environmental Information – The design basis for relief systems and 
fire protection systems is not available for review. 
3. Hazards Analysis – Action items resulting from facility-level Hazard Analyses are 
not formally reviewed, consistently closed-out, nor verified for effective 
implementation. 
4. Management of Change – The Management of Change process is not consistently 
used for both operating procedure revisions and supervisory personnel changes. 
5. Operating Procedures – Operating Procedures are not consistently reviewed at the 
conclusion of specified periods (separate from the Management of Change process) 
to verify that they reflect current operating practices offshore. 
6. Safe Work Practices – Safety Data Sheets do not accurately reflect all chemicals 
listed on the facility inventory sheet. 
7. Training – Safe Work Practices training for contract personnel, such as hot work, 
lock-out/tag-out, confined space entry, etc., has not been consistently verified as 
compliant with internal requirements. 
8. Mechanical Integrity – The preventative maintenance/inspections/tests for critical 
equipment are not consistently executed in accordance with the established 
frequencies required by the Mechanical Integrity program. 
9. Pre-Startup Review – The Pre-Startup Review Policy does not have clear guidance 
regarding conditions that trigger a review, regardless of whether there is an 
associated Management of Change initiated. 
10. Emergency Response and Control – An analysis and critique of each drill is not 
consistently completed by facility personnel. When critiques are completed for drills, 
SAFETY ALERT 

A Safety Alertis a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations 
that could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf.
the critiques do not include actions to take for continuous improvement. 
11. Incident Investigation – Evidence could not be located to support the proper 
training qualifications for designated Incident Investigation team members. 
Additionally, Incident Investigation reports were missing identification of one or more 
team members associated with the investigation. 
12. Auditing – The SEMS plan contains obsolete language from the SEMS I Rule or the 
SEMS plan has not been updated to reflect current SEMS II requirements. 
13. Recordkeeping and Documentation – SEMS documents, primarily Job Safety 
Analyses and Operating Procedures, are not kept in an orderly manner nor readily 
available upon request at the time of the audit. 
14. Stop Work Authority – Job Safety Analyses are without the required Stop Work 
Authority procedures and expectations as a standard statement. 
15. Ultimate Work Authority – The SEMS program does not clearly define the 
communication expectations for establishing the designated Ultimate Work 
Authority, including when the responsibility shifts to a different individual. 
16. Employee Participation Plan – There were no recorded findings in this element 
during the 3-year period from 11/16/2016 to 11/15/2019. 
17. Reporting Unsafe Working Conditions – The Reporting Unsafe Working 
Conditions element should be a separate notice from other facility requirements that 
are posted throughout a facility (e.g. Stop Work Authority, Ultimate Work Authority, 
etc.). Additionally, the Reporting Unsafe Working Conditions signage should contain 
the updated BSEE address (refer to Safety Alert No. 357). 
Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators and contractors working on the Gulf of 
Mexico OCS consider the following: 
· Review your SEMS program to determine if any gaps exist in your management 
system then initiate and implement appropriate corrective actions; 
· Share any potential updates to your SEMS program with field personnel (including 
contractors) for awareness of changes that directly affect their day-to-day duties; 
· Revise bridging documents to include SEMS program updates as necessary; and, 
· Request feedback from employees and third-party contractors to ensure effective 
functionality of the SEMS program as it pertains to your scope of operations. 
--BSEE-- 