

 
SAFETY ALERT 
Contact: bseepublicaffairs@bsee.gov 
Phone: (800) 200-4853 
  
  
 
 
 
 Red Zone
1
 Hazards Pose Increased Risk to Personnel During 
Lifting Operations 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The offshore work environment is inherently hazardous with heavy equipment, swinging 
lines, complex machinery, and a myriad of   other hazards posing a potential risk to 
personnel. Recent red zone incidents highlight the continuing safety challenges offshore 
lifting operations can create. Examples include: 
• A rig was in the process of offloading a 65-foot basket from the deck of an 
offshore supply vessel when the deck hand was pinned between the load and the 
vessel rails (pictured above). 
• A load shifted during an equipment positioning activity, causing an employee’s 
arm to be caught between the load and handrail. 
 
1
 “R ed zone” hazards, like “line of fire” hazards,  occur when a worker is in the direct path of an object if a 
release of energy from that object would cause the worker to be hit, struck, pinched, impaled, crushed, or 
caught between objects. Injuries from red zone incidents range from minor incidents, such as a pinched 
finger,  to fatalities. 
 
  
 
Safety Alert No. 468 
August 29, 2023 

 
 
• A crane raising a    junk tool weighing 3.5 tons shifted toward a worker and pushed 
him back into a basket that was on the deck. 
These are just a few of the dangers workers routinely face when operating offshore. By 
simply barricading the work areas and restricting access to areas where the worker is 
exposed to potential harm an operator can mitigate these risks. Establishing barricades 
or “red zone” areas to restrict workers from entering areas where they can be in the red 
zone of a hazard is a recommended practice for eliminating red zone incidents.  
In addition, BSEE recommends operators and their contractors, where 
appropriate, consider:  
• Developing and enforcing all red zone rules and when possible, avoiding all 
areas barricaded off or designated as higher risk.    
• Handling taglines with care. Taglines can become a hazard when tangled or 
when too close to the load. Making sure taglines are the appropriate length and 
only used when necessary for the job. Limiting hand placement on the load when 
possible. 
• Using proper rigging (e.g., slings, straps, etc.) and proper lifting devices (e.g., 
cranes, tuggers, etc.) for each specific job and verifying that they are in adequate 
condition. 
• Being aware of the surroundings and planning an exit route should one be 
needed. During a lift, watching the load in case it begins to sway and never 
standing beneath it. Ensuring that you are not in an area where you, or any part 
of you, can be pinned against something. Making sure there are no obstructions 
in your vicinity that could be a pinch-point hazard, and always having a clear 
escape path. 
• Constantly monitoring weather conditions. High winds and sea swells will cause 
increased movement of facilities, vessels, and loads. Stopping the job if the load 
cannot be fully controlled during heightened weather conditions. 
• Avoiding complacency on the job. Offshore is a dynamic environment that must 
be continuously monitored to ensure safe operations, especially during lifting 
operations. Maintaining concentration on all tasks throughout a tour, even if 
monotonous at times. Speaking up at any time if you are experiencing 
exhaustion and need a break. 
• Communicating clearly to ensure everyone is ready to begin the lift and 
maintaining communication throughout the lift to make sure everything is on 
track. 

 
 
• Reviewing Safety Alert 424, Safety Alert 445, and Safety Alert 446 for additional 
recommendations concerning poor body placement and lack of situational 
awareness.  
 
– BSEE – 
 
 
A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations that 
could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
 
 
Category: Cranes/Lifting, Personnel Safety, Taglines 