

         Damaged transformer  
Damaged Bus Bar Bolts 
Damaged Bus 
 
Safety Alert No. 411                            Contact: David Nedorostek 
February 9, 2021                                   Phone: (703) 787-1029 
 
Electrical Fire Damages Equipment in Motor Control Center  
 
An electrical fire occurred in the Motor Control Center (MCC) on an offshore production 
platform when an electrician engaged the circuit breaker for a Pipeline Pump motor. 
While checking the operation of motor #3, the electrician engaged the breaker and 
immediately heard crackling inside the MCC breaker cabinet
1
. The electrician went to 
disengage the breaker and heard a pop inside the cabinet as he turned it off, resulting in 
a platform power shutdown.  
  
As the electrician opened the MCC breaker cabinet, he smelled smoke and saw a ½” 
flame under the control transformer. He immediately used a fire extinguisher to 
extinguish the flame and instinctively removed the breaker cabinet's   fuses and resistors 
to prevent any other possible flare-up and to eliminate all possible connectivity within 
the MCC breaker cabinet. He also performed a Lockout/Tagout by placing a lock on the 
breaker arm
 to ensure no power could circulate.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1
 Motor Control Center (MCC) cabinets are metal enclosures that house components such as variable frequency 
drives, motor starters, resistors, contactors, circuit breakers, fuses, disconnect switches, and overload relays. They 
play a very important role in the industrial power control and distribution systems.  
SAFETY ALERT 
 
 

2 
Analysis of the Incident 
 
• Three bolts/nuts on the bus bar
2
 connecting the breaker to the bus straps were 
either loose or damaged prior to energizing the circuit. This resulted in the bus bar 
heating up the circuit and causing an overload of current on the transformer. 
Additionally, the bolts/nuts had not been inspected recently to determine if they had 
been properly torqued or damaged prior to operation.
  
 
• Insulation on the bus bar behind the breaker showed signs of significant dust build-
up as evidenced by visible electrical surface track
3
 marks. This dust likely caused an 
electric arc.  
 
• Insulation was damaged on two wire connections that travel from the breaker/bus 
bar to the control voltage transformer. 
 
 
Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators and contractors consider the 
following: 
 
• Establish inspection and maintenance policies/procedures to include:
4
 
o Scheduling the examination of electrical systems; 
 
o Conducting an infrared or thermographic inspection
5
 in accordance with 
manufacturer’s recommendations, and document this inspection;  
 
o Measuring insulation resistance and testing polarization index before an MCC 
is re-energized (after installation or regular maintenance);  
 
o Examining all barriers/insulators and replace any that show signs of arcing 
damage, tracking, excessive heat, or cracking; 
  
o Inspecting all power and control wiring, replacing any wire that has worn 
insulation or shows signs of overheating or cracking; 
 
 
2
 A bus bar is a metallic strip or bar (typically copper, brass or aluminum) that conducts electricity within a 
switchboard, distribution board, substation, battery bank, or other electrical apparatus. Its main purpose is to 
conduct a substantial current of electricity, and not to function as a structural member.  
3
 Electrical surface tracking is a phenomenon where an electric current burns the top layer of an insulation 
material and allows the current to migrate across the insulation and ultimately cause damage. Electrical surface 
tracking is defined as the number of seconds that a material resists the formation of a surface conducting path 
when subjected to an intermittent arc of high voltage and low current characteristics. 
4
 Per API 14F, Annex A which describes inspection intervals for equipment; and 2
nd
 Tier reference document NFPA 
70B, titled, Recommended Practice for Electrical Equipment Maintenance. 
5
Infrared or Thermographic inspections are beneficial in reducing electrical failures by identifying potentially 
dangerous conditions such as, loose or dirty connections, overloaded or imbalanced circuits, or improperly 
installed equipment. By measuring the heat imbalance relative to the environment and surrounding 
equipment, abnormal or adverse conditions can be uncovered that if left unattended would worsen to the 
point of failure. 

A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations 
that could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
Categories: Arc Flash; Fire; Power Outage  
3 
• Develop a quality control policy/procedure that provides guidance for 
inspection/maintenance that specifically addresses potential electrical issues, 
including dust accumulation on the bus bar; 
        
• Ensure bolts/nuts are properly torqued to the Original Equipment Manufacturer 
specifications and inspect them for damage prior to energizing the circuit; 
 
• Document all repair and/or replacement of electrical components. When 
changes are made to the electrical distribution system, update and distribute all 
applicable drawings and maintenance schedules to reflect the changes; and,  
 
• Examine all bus bars and connectors, and replace any parts that are badly 
discolored, corroded, pitted, etc. Establish a replacement schedule for parts 
subjected to excessive temperatures.  
 
--BSEE--  
 