U.S. Department of the Interior
Minerals Management Service
Gulf of Mexico OCS Region
Safety Alert No. 210
January 8, 2003
Contact: Lee Fowler
(979) 266-1004
Blowout After Cementing Surface Casing
While drilling a well, an operator noted a slight gas flow coming from the annulus between the surface and
conductor casing shortly after cementing the surface casing. The diverter was closed and pressure started
increasing on the annulus. Attempts to bleed off the pressure were unsuccessful. Two days later, gas belched
from the drive pipe of an adjacent well. Soon thereafter, gas bubbles were noticed coming from other wells at
the water line. The platform was safely evacuated, and the flow eventually ceased.
The subsequent MMS investigation of the incident noted the following conditions encountered by the operator
while performing the surface casing cement procedure: a delay in initiating the cement job because of a top drive
electrical problem, a temporary loss of returns while pumping cement, and premature cement returns while
pumping the cement.
It has been concluded in part by the MMS investigation of this event that the well control problem was probably
caused by the regression of the cement density to a seawater gradient and/or the formation of a channel
because of the delay in pumping cement. MMS stresses the importance of and recommends pumping cement as
soon as possible after landing casing and circulating at least one casing volume.
Other aspects of this incident are currently being studied by MMS.
For details of the accident, seeOCS Report MMS 2002-080. Copies of the report may be obtained from the
MMS Public Information Office located at 1201 Elmwood Park Boulevard, New Orleans, Louisiana 70123
(1-800-200-GULF or local 504-736-2519), or can be read and downloaded at the Regional website.
—MMS—GOMR—
www.gomr.mms.gov
Visit our Safety Information Website
Safety Alert No. 210 - Blowout After Cementing Surface Casinghttp://www.gomr.boemre.gov/homepg/offshore/safety/safealt/SA_210...
1 of 12/21/2012 4:38 PM