

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MMS 
U.S. Department of the Interior 
Minerals Management Service 
 Gulf of Mexico OCS Region
 Safety 
Alert 
Safety Alert No. 279 	Contact:  Glynn T. Breaux 
14 April 2009 	(504) 736-2560 
Nylon Sling Failure 
Recently a 2-inch nylon web sling parted while being used to support an e-line lubricator, 
resulting in the lubricator and tool string striking the platform’s grated deck prior to entering the 
Gulf of Mexico. All material was recovered with no reports of injuries or pollution. 
An MMS investigation into this incident revealed that: (1) personnel utilized improper rigging 
practice for lifting the lubricator. The lubricator was equipped with a lifting bracket for use with 
a two part sling, but the decision was made to utilize a nylon sling cinched in a choker type 
manner just below the lifting bracket, and (2) personnel failed to provide suitable protection 
between the nylon sling and the lifting bracket on the lubricator. The nylon sling was cinched in 
a manner that allowed the sharp edge of the lubricator’s lifting bracket to chafe the nylon 
material at a point that was not visible to personnel involved in the task.  
MMS, therefore, recommends that: 
•	 When handling specialty equipment such as wireline/e-line lubricators, operators should 
use the lifting equipment (lifting bracket) that is provided in the manner in which it was 
designed and intended for use. When this is not possible, a hazards analysis should be 
conducted before deviating from the intended procedure to identify all potential failures 
of the alternative method and possible mitigations to those failures. 
•	 Operators review the general guidelines on the proper use of slings located in API RP 2D 
– Operations and Maintenance of Offshore Cranes, Fifth Edition, June 2003, with 
specific attention to: 
o	 Section 5.2.1 – Sling Use and Inspection; 
o	 Appendix B, Section C.3.2.2c – Sling Use Guidelines; and, 
o	 Appendix G, Section C.5.2.1 – Use of Slings. 
•	 Operators review Safety Alert #257 issued on January 10, 2008, and titled Three Crane 
Accidents Caused by Improper Rigging for additional information. 
--MMS--GOMR--
www.gomr.mms.gov 