

 
SAFETY ALERT 
Contact: bseepublicaffairs@bsee.gov 
Phone: (800) 200-4853 
  
Figure 1 – Temporarily installed air dryer with bull hose connections. 
Original whip check position (Left Circle) and the location of the injured 
persons hand placement on the air supply valve (Right Circle). 
  
 
 
 
Person Injured When Safety Mechanisms Failed 
 
                            
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A third-party contract operator sandblasting on an offshore facility in the Gulf of Mexico 
was injured when a temporary air dryer used for sandblasting operations recoiled and 
broke the safety cable.  
Based on their inspection at the facility, BSEE inspectors identified the following details: 
• A worker was refilling the sand pot with an abrasive material to continue 
sandblasting operations.  
• After confirming the air supply valve from the temporary air dryer to the sand pot 
was shut-in, the worker attempted to disconnect the air supply valve (Figure 1 – 
Right Circle) from the air dryer.  
• As the worker tried to access this coupling, he loosened the T-connection. The T-
connection blew off and broke the braided steel cable (i.e., whip check or safety 
cable) designed to suppress the hose recoil when a pressurized release occurs.  
• The whip check ends were looped between the hose and the coupling 
connection.  (Figure 1 – Left Circle).    
  
 
Safety Alert No. 455 
Feb. 17, 2023 
Figure 2 - Broken whip check from the incident. 

 
 
• The T-  connection and broken whip check (see Figure 2) caused multiple cuts 
and abrasions to the worker’s  head and shoulders. 
BSEE inspectors identified the following contributing factors: 
• The baling wire involved in the 
incident (Figure 3) was slightly 
corroded, potentially diminishing 
its overall integrity. Baling wire is 
used as an additional safety 
measure to ensure couplings are 
securely connected. It is often 
used in place of a cotter pin on 
crowfoot couplings.  
• The failed whip check cable was 
improperly crimped. Crimping the 
whip check cable before placing it 
into service allows it to function 
correctly at its full rated capacity.  
• The bull hose configuration on the air inlet valve from the platform air compressor 
was installed in a horizontal position. This added weight caused the T-connection 
to be off-center at the time of operation, adding stress on the associated 
couplings and baling wire. The added weight, combined with the worker’s force 
when manipulating the air supply valve to the sand pot, resulted in air escaping 
the inlet valve from the platform compressor, likely causing the connection to 
come loose. 
Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators and contractors do the following:  
 
•    Conduct a pre-job hazard assessment 
with all affected personnel, including 
facility leadership, to confirm all aspects 
and associated mitigations of the task 
are understood. 
•    Install stainless steel tie wires in addition 
to whip checks on bull hoses to reduce 
the risk of disconnection. 
•    Install 90-degree fittings (Figure 4) to 
eliminate the horizontal orientation of the 
supply hose, reducing the stress at each 
connection. 
Figure 3 – Baling wire on coupling that released.    
 
Figure 4 – 90-Degree fitting recommendation. 
 
 

 
 
•    Depressurize equipment prior to adjusting valves when practical. 
•    Inspect all equipment and parts pre-job to ensure they are in adequate condition. 
 
 
 
– BSEE – 
 
 
A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations that 
could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
 
 
Category: Cranes/Lifting  