

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
Safety Alert No. 243 Contact: Glenn Woltman
September 6, 2006 (504) 736-2438 
Unplanned Riser Disconnect Results in Spill 
An unplanned disconnect of the Lower Marine Riser Package from the subsea blowout preventer 
equipment was recently initiated on a semi-submersible rig engaged in exploratory activities, during a 
time of shifting loop currents coupled with quickly deteriorating met-ocean conditions from tropical 
storm developments, the total of which pushed the rig’s DP system capability to the limits, leading to 
an unacceptable loss of rig position. 
While the riser volume was being displaced with seawater in preparation for the disconnect operation, 
the rig was no longer able to maintain station.  As a result, the riser was disconnected from the Lower 
Marine Riser Package, and 710 barrels of synthetic mud was released into the Gulf of Mexico.  
An MMS investigation concluded in part that the inability of the rig to maintain station adequately, 
resulting in the subsequent release of synthetic mud into the Gulf, was primarily the result of 
inappropriate DP rig selection for the environment in which it was to operate.  Procedures onboard 
the vessel at the time of this incident did not adequately take into account the proper watch areas and 
appropriate T-times for certain action items to be taken during deteriorating sea conditions.  These 
procedures were revised after the incident to reflect loop currents and associated eddies in the Gulf of 
Mexico better. 

 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
To ensure that industry adopts similar best practices, the following are recommended with respect to 
dynamically positioned drilling rigs: 
1) Lessees and operators should review the adequacy of their policies/plan regarding planned and 
unplanned riser disconnects. 
2) Riser disconnect policies/plans should address at a minimum the following:  
a.	 A site-specific riser disconnect /policy plan per location as a complement to a general 
plan. 
b.	 The obtaining of site-specific environmental/oceanographic data for the purpose of 
position holding and riser angle minimization considerations. 
c.	 The criteria for the initiation of riser disconnect operations as a function of impending 
tropical storm conditions. 
d.	 The routine review of T-time estimates during storm seasons. 
—MMS—GOMR— 
Visit our Safety Information Website 
A complete account of the accident is available on the MMS website at 
http://www.gomr.mms.gov/homepg/offshore/safety/acc_repo/accindex.html 