

                        
       
  
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 Safety Alert No. 236 Contact:  Jack Williams
 February 3, 2006 (504) 736-1757 
Fatality Caused by Snagged Stabbing Board 
Recently, as a casing crew was laying down casing, a prototype mobile hydraulic stabbing board 
(HSB), operated by the casing crew “stabber,” was caught on the ascending top drive.  The personnel 
bucket was flipped, pinning the “stabber” against the HSB arm, causing his death.  A complete 
account of the accident is available on the MMS website at 
http://www.gomr.mms.gov/homepg/offshore/safety/acc_repo/accindex.html 
The MMS investigation concluded that the HSB exhibited a significant “delay” before reacting to 
the controls, and the “stabber” attempted to shorten the work cycle by timing the passage of the block 
and top drive.  The “stabber” activated the controls too early, driving the personnel bucket into the 
ascending top drive. 
It was also concluded the delayed control reaction was caused primarily by improper maintenance 
or setup.  The delay in control reaction had been recognized but not repaired, because all field 
personnel believed the delay was a designed safety element of the system. In fact, no hydraulic 
control delay was designed into the HSB and the delayed reaction was likely caused by common 
hydraulic issues.   
The MMS recommends the Operators ensure the following: 
•	 Operators should conduct a hazard analysis prior to deploying new equipment. 
•	 Field personnel should have formal training and a full understanding of operation, 
maintenance, and trouble-shooting of any new or prototype equipment. 
•	 Written procedures for the operation, maintenance, and monitoring of new or prototype 
equipment should be in place and in use before new or prototype equipment are used. 
•	 When using new or prototype equipment, field personnel should have a formal method for 
reporting unusual or anomalous operating characteristics and receiving timely support. 
•	 New or prototype equipment should be formally inspected when it is initially installed, and 
should be confirmed to be operating to design specifications before being used. 
—MMS—GOMR— 
www.gomr.mms.gov 