

 
 
Contact: bseepublicaffairs@bsee.gov 
Phone: 800.200.4853 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
Fires During Decommissioning Cause Injuries 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Recently, a contractor was injured by a severe flash fire while performing “hot work”
1
 on a 
pipeline skid during decommissioning activities. While cutting a section of 12-inch pipe using a 
five-foot cutting torch, a flash fire struck the contractor on the right side of his face. Fire watch 
personnel quickly extinguished the fire, and the contractor was immediately transported to shore 
to treat his burns.  
 
Six months before this incident, the pipe was flushed, filled with seawater, and inspected by 
opening several needle valves. Clear salt water was discharged before the hot work activity 
commenced. However, releasing the salt water did not eliminate the trapped hydrocarbons from 
the pipe. The first cut was made on the lower end of the pipe without incident, suggesting that 
 
1
 Hot work includes all work operations which make use of or create sources of ignition. Examples of sources of 
ignition include welding, hot tapping of pipes and tanks, use of open flame(s), use of cutting torches and grinding, 
electric heat guns, sandblasting, electrical hand tools, megger testing, soldering, flash cameras, nail guns and other 
non-explosion proof electrical equipment. 
  
 
Safety Alert No. 453 
December 13, 2022 
SAFETY ALERT 
 
 
Figure 1.  Contractor employee conducting hot work 
 

 
 
the line did not contain flammable vapors or liquids. When the contractor made the second cut 
on the upper end of the pipe, the gas ignited, causing the flash fire (see figure 1, above). 
 
Contributing Factors included the following: 
• Insufficient identification of hazards: The Job Safety Analysis (JSA)
2
 covered the pipe-
cutting operation and several other decommissioning activities. It addressed common 
hazards for this job but only briefly mentioned testing for flammable gas. 
 
• Inadequate work planning: A detailed work procedure specific to cutting and removing 
piping was not developed, and the entire decommissioning project did not have a work 
plan. 
 
• Deficient work-permitting system: There was no isolation verification (e.g., mechanical 
barrier) nor pre-job validation that the pipe contained no flammable gas; the pipe was 
presumed safe and ready for demolition.  
 
• Insufficient policies and procedures: The hot work permit and JSA were unclear about 
gas detection requirements for the Lower Explosive Limit (LEL)
3
. 
 
Therefore, BSEE recommends operators and contractors do the following:  
 
• Always assume that all piping and vessels that previously contained flammable liquids 
or vapors may still contain these flammable gasses until it has been positively verified 
that there is no longer hazardous. Piping or vessels isolated from potential hydrocarbon 
sources using only a single barrier (e.g., a closed ball valve) should also be assumed to 
contain flammable hydrocarbons. 
• Understand that gravity draining a vessel or pipe and opening them to the atmosphere 
may not be sufficient to remove all flammable liquids and vapors. 
• Plan and conduct multi-disciplinary pre-job risk assessment.  
• Develop job-specific procedures for:  
 Determining no hydrocarbons are present inside vessels or piping before 
cutting or breaking containment.
4
  
 Removing hydrocarbons if they are present.  
 
2
 Job Safety Analysis (JSA) is a systematic procedure that breaks each job/task into key training sequences, 
identifies safety elements of each job/task step and coaches the employee on how to avoid potential safety 
hazards. 
3
 Lower Explosive Limit (LEL) is defined as the lowest concentration (by percentage) of a flammable gas or vapor in 
air that can produce a flash of fire in presence of an ignition source (arc, flame, heat, etc.). At concentrations lower 
than the LEL, the mixture is too “lean” to burn. 
4
 Breaking Containment is the act of breaking the integrity of process piping or equipment that may contain toxic 
or hazardous products. It is a planned loss of containment where there is potential for trapped pressure, or 
exposure to a toxic commodity or unknown material. 

 
 
 Ensuring hydrocarbons will not enter piping or vessels during the job (e.g., 
closing and locking valves, installing pipe plugs, etc.). 
• Develop and follow hot work policy/procedures
5
 for tasks involving special hazards 
(e.g., welding, flame cutting, removing barriers separating hydrocarbons from work 
areas (breaking containment), working at heights, working in confined spaces, etc.). 
• Ensure all contractors use proper work permits and comply with requirements. 
• Ensure all operations and contract personnel attend and participate in a pre-job JSA 
meeting to evaluate the specific job tasks, hazards, and necessary control measures for 
all hot work and ensure that the supervisors of all phases of the work know and 
understand the complete job scope. 
• Ensure all operations and contract personnel involved in hot work attend and participate 
in a pre-job meeting/toolbox talk.
6
  
 All workers should review the JSA and should ensure that all hazards are 
acknowledged, and that policies/procedures, guidelines, contingencies, and 
communications are understood. 
 Verify that the gas detector’s audible alarms (e.g., high %LEL reading) will be 
heard in the work area and the individuals know how to respond to the alarm. 
• Consider splitting larger jobs with multiple tasks into organized respective units via JSAs 
and work permits.  
• Ensure operator, contractor, and service company employees recognize and understand 
that inadequate communication is one of the most common causes of major accidents, 
especially when performing hot work. 
• Always ensure that all individuals involved in the task wear proper Personal Protective 
Equipment (PPE).  
 
– BSEE –  
 
 
 
 
5
 Hot work policies/procedures should establish the minimum safe working guidelines for the operation on 
cutting, welding, brazing, grinding, and soldering or any other similar operation. 
6
 Toolbox talks allow you and your workers to explore the risks of specific health and safety issues on your site and 
think about ways to deal with them. Toolbox talks should focus on safety topics and be held regularly for greatest 
impact. Toolbox Talks should focus on techniques that keep workers safe and reinforce that we should never 
sacrifice safety for increased productivity. 
A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations that 
could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
 
 
Category: Fire, Decommissioning   