

Contact: bseepublicaffairs@bsee.gov 
Phone: (800) 200-4853 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 Stored Energy in Slings Causes Multiple Injuries 
 
                   
 
 
 
 
There have been multiple instances across the Gulf of Mexico in which offshore 
personnel have sustained injuries to the face while working with slings. These incidents 
resulted from stored energy in the slings. Recent incidents include the following: 
 
• In December 2021, a contract roustabout slid a sling off a joint of drill pipe, which 
left a double loop in the sling. While unhooking the shackle from the sling, the 
stored energy in the double loop released, causing the sling to strike the 
roustabout in the mouth. The injured party (IP) lost multiple teeth as a result. 
 
• In March 2022, a loop in a sling moved while the crew was working to separate 
slings with the intent to hook them up to a crane. The loop struck the IP in the 
face, resulting in damage to several teeth and a lip abrasion. 
 
  
 
SAFETY ALERT 
 
 
March 2022 - A section of sling caught on another 
sling’s eye becomes stored energy. 
 
May 2022 - A trapped shackle becomes stored 
energy. 
 
Safety Alert No. 445 
June 29, 2022 

• In May 2022, a trapped shackle dislodged from the edge of a beam during lifting 
operations in which a roustabout was holding a tagline attached to the end of a 
web sling. As the shackle was freed, it struck the roustabout in the cheek/nose 
area, causing injury. 
 
In both 2022 incidents, the IPs were Short Service Employees (SSE).  BSEE has also 
seen a recent increase in the number of incidents involving SSEs, as referenced in 
Safety Alert 440. 
 
Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators and contractors consider:  
 
•    Raising stored energy awareness with crews during safety meetings, toolbox talks, 
etc. 
 
•    Reviewing Job Safety Analyses (JSA) for both high-risk and routine operations and 
verifying they include job-specific instructions and associated mitigations for potential 
hazards, including the hazards of stored energy in rigging and improper positioning of 
rigging in relation to the rigger’s body. 
 
•    Updating lifting and rigging procedures to include good body positioning and checking 
rig  ging for stored energy. 
 
•    Incorporating an additional verification measure within operating procedures and/or 
hazards analyses for situational awareness regarding line of fire exposure. 
 
•    Ensuring appropriate personnel have access to the necessary operating procedures 
and understand them before performing work. 
 
•    Reducing risks related to double handling through deck management initiatives. 
 
•    Reinforcing the right and obligation to stop the job without fear of reprisal. 
 
•    Increasing training and supervision of SSEs.  
 
• Reviewing this Safety Alert in conjunction with Safety Alert No. 435 and Safety Alert No. 
279. 
 
– BSEE – 
 
 
 
 
A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations that 
could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
 
 
Category: Cranes/Lifting, Personnel Safety, Short Service Employees, Tag Lines  