

 
Safety Alert No. 424                      Contact: bseepublicaffairs@bsee.gov       
August 12, 2021                     Phone: (800) 200-4853 
 
 
 Recent Uptick in Lifting Injuries due to Unrecognized Pinch 
Point Hazards 
 
                                                              
In the first half of Calendar Year 2021, numerous incidents reported to BSEE were classified 
as pinch points, resulting in injuries varying in severity (i.e., from first aids to lost-time 
accidents). The tasks leading up to the incidents were primarily associated with 
lifting/rigging. Due to the significant increase in these types of occurrences in the Gulf of 
Mexico, BSEE concentrated on the relevant hazards to identify improvement opportunities. 
Below are the descriptions of sampled events for background:  
 
 
Incident #1: Rig floor personnel attempted to reposition a Connex box initially set in a 
precarious orientation on a pipe rack. When the crane operator began to lift the load, the 
box inadvertently shifted, causing the box to pin the arm of the individual monitoring the 
load between a sling rack and the load (see photograph above). The injured person 
sustained bruising and abrasions on his right arm. 
SAFETY ALERT 
 
 
Re-enactment of Pinch Point Location as Identified in Incident #1. 

 
A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations that could 
assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
 
 
Category: Crane/Lifting 
Incident #2: During a dynamic lift offloading grating from the facility to the motor vessel 
(M/V), the M/V deckhand guided the load using a tagline. As the load approached the 
M/V, the crane operator lowered the boom to avoid an obstruction on the boat's deck. 
Simultaneously, the deckhand began pushing the load with his hands to provide 
additional assistance in preventing contact. The load briefly contacted the boat deck 
during this movement, pinching the deckhand's finger between the two pieces of grating 
being lifted, resulting in a partial amputation. 
Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators and contractors consider the following: 
• Verify all designated flaggers assigned to monitoring the load can maintain 
open communication and a clear line of sight throughout the lift. 
• Ensure pre-job reviews contain discussion points for reducing the risk of a 
pinch point incident occurring, such as load dimensions, load travel path, 
environmental conditions (i.e., sea state and wind speed), and Stop Work 
Authority. 
• Confirm the boom is centered over the load before the lift to minimize the 
potential for the load to swing. 
• Validate an adequate amount of deck space is available to maneuver, control, 
and land the load safely. 
• Emphasize to field crews Hands-Off / Hands-Free standards when a load is in 
suspension or transit. 
• Promote the use of taglines throughout the entire lifting operation. 
 
--BSEE-- 
 
 
 
  