Safety Alert No.   209 - Crane Accident on the  Norwegian OCS http://www.gomr.boemre.gov/homepg/offshore/safety/safealt/SA_209... 
U.S.   Department of the Interior  
Minerals Management Service  
Gulf   of  Mexico OCS Region  
Safety  Alert     No.   209 
 
December  20,  2002   
Contact:  Frank  Pausina  
(504)  736-   2560  
Crane  Accident  on  the   Norwegian  OCS  
Recently, the Norwegian Petroleum Directorate (NPD) issued the following Safety Notice: 
“Fatal accident during lifting operation. 
Recently, a person was   killed in an accident during a lifting operation on the  Norwegian continental shelf. The  accident is 
still  under investigation, but  we think   it is  necessary to relate some   of the  incidents that   lead   to the  accident as this  may   help 
in preventing similar accidents in the  future. 
Brief account of the accident. 
Two  chemical pods had   been  stacked on top  of each other. Preparations were    being made to move the  upper pod onto   the 
deck  by means of the  crane. During the  lifting operation, the  pendant which was   not   connected to the  pod   slings, got   stuck 
between the  pods frame work and  the  pod. By lifting the  pendant, it snagged the  frame causing the  pod to slide, and  fell   down 
and hit a person. 
Preliminaryfindings. 
Pods of the  type   shown (see   picture at the  website, below) have   proven to be unstable when stacked on top of 
each other. The  retaining mechanism (see  circle at the  website) appears to be insufficient to prevent sliding 
when a force is applied to the  pod. 
Recommendation. 
Special attention should be paid   to stacking of equipment. Only    equipment specially designed for  safe  stacking offshore 
should be stacked. Chains or  wire   slings should be long  enough to be hooked on at deck level.” 
To view   the  Safety Notice, including the  above-referenced “picture” and   “circle”, your   attention is directed to 
the following NPD   Site  Map   website: 
http://www.npd.no/English/veiviser/s%F8king/soekeresultat.htm 
MMS recommends to all  operators and  contractors that  all aspects of the  Safety Notice that   are relevant and 
applicable to your   lifting operations be considered. 
—MMS—GOMR— 
www.gomr.mms.gov 
Visit   our   Safety Information Website 
1 of 1 2/21/2012 4:38 PM