

Safety Alert No. 408                                   Contact: Bethram Ofolete 
January 22, 2021                                                 Phone: (805) 384-6370 
Fire Damages a Platform’s Living Quarters and Nearby Areas 
On November 29, 2020, a fire occurred on a platform in the Pacific Region near the smoke 
shack outside of the living quarters building. High winds spread the fire to an adjacent 
plastic storage shed and caused significant damage to the living quarters and associated 
areas,  including steel walls, beams, gratings,  etc. A burning cigarette filter in a   cigarette 
receptacle is suspected as the source of the of fire. 
After realizing that the General Alarm (GA) and the GAI-Tronics Public Announcement (PA) 
systems were rendered inoperable by the fire, an employee immediately began alerting 
crew members in the living quarters by going door to door. The Person-In-Charge then 
activated the fire alarm connected to a separate system. 
Some of the damage resulting from the fire is shown in the photographs below. 
                             
BSEE’s Investigation identified the following deficiencies and concerns related to 
the fire incident: 
§The platform’s general alarm and intercom/page system shared a circuit, which 
resulted in both failing due to the fire; 
§Firefighting equipment in proximity to the fire location was inadequate; 
§The smoking area was not effectively monitored or maintained; 
§The appropriate receptacles were not used and were not properly maintained; 
SAFETY ALERT 

A Safety Alertis a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations 
that could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf.
Categories:Fire; Living Quarters
§The was a lack of understanding of the use of alarm system procedures; and, 
§There was a large quantity of paper (i.e., combustible material) stored in a shed 
adjacent to the smoking area, which caused the fire to rapidly spread and engulf 
the storage shed. 
Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators and contractors consider the following: 
§ Ensure safety systems (including the PA and GA systems) are separately wired 
with appropriate redundancies; 
§ Guarantee that smoking areas are maintained and equipped with proper 
disposal receptacles and safety systems; 
§ Perform a hazard analysis to identify and mitigate potential fire hazards in the 
area; 
§ Review platform safety procedures and conduct appropriate drills; and, 
§ Review Safety Alert 354, which highlights a similar incident in 2019. 
--BSEE-- 