

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
Lower  St  airwell Step  Collapses  Causing  Injury  
 
 
An injury  occurred when  a contract employee was  descending  the mezzanine well deck area 
heading  to the lower second deck.  When the  Injured Person (IP) reached the last step, the  
fiberglass bracing  of the  metal step collapsed causing  the worker to fall to the deck and injure his  
knee.  
 
A BSEE investigation revealed the following  for  the fiberglass bracing:  
 
•	  The bracing  supporting  the  st ep may  have 

ex  ceeded the manufacturer’s 20-year  life 

expectancy.
  
•	  The bracing  may  have deteriorated due to 

periodic exposure to chemicals or 

prolonged exposure to weather or 

ex  cessive vibration. 
 
•	 
 Unless inspected closely,  the bracing 

appeared to be  in  good condition. 
 
 
The onsite  Lease  Operator took the following  
steps to prevent the reoccurrence of  this incident:  
 
 
•	  Replaced the fiberglass bracing  with 
 
more durable aluminum supports.  
 
•	  Added diagonal and cross bracing  for 

additional strength  and support. 
 
•	  Installed J-bolts to secure  st airway  to 

lower  grating  deck.
  
•	  Inspected similar construction on all 

associated facilities to verify  the safety  of 

the  st ep bracing  of  all stairwells. 
 
Safety 
Al   ert 
U.S. Department of the Inte rior 
Bureau of Safety and 
BSEE 
EnvironmentalEnforcement 
Gulf of Mexico OCS Region 
Safety Alert No. 307 Contact:  Rob Carroll 
19 March 2014 (504) 736-2671 

Therefore, BSEE recommends that  Lessees, Operators and their Contractors should:  
•	  Inspect all stairwells to det  ermine the type of bracing  that supports the  st eps.  
•	  Install and maintain all fiberglass bracing  as per   the manufacturer’ s installation and 
maintenance  recommendations.  
•	  Schedule periodic maintenance to ensure adherence to manufacturer’ s recommendations  
with  regard to fiberglass  bracing.  
•	  Take  specific precautions  to aging  fiberglass bracing  construction nearing  the 

manufacturer’s  replacement  recommendations. 
 
--BSEE--GOMR-­ 
www.gomr.BSEE.gov  
A  Safety  Al   ert  is  a tool  us  ed  by   BSEE  to  inform  the  offshore  oil  and  gas   
industry  of the circumstances  surrounding   an   accident  or a near miss.   It  also 
contains  recommendations  that  should  help prevent  th e recurrence  of such  
an   incident  on   th e  Outer Continental  Shelf.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 