

 
Safety Alert No. 385                                Contact: Quoc Dang 
May 15, 2020              Phone: (504) 736-7535 
 
 
Improper Installation of Safety Devices on Heater Treaters 
 
          
                     
  
 
 
 
In September 2019, a production process alarm on a heater treater activated when the 
burner went offline. Workers relit the burner in attempt to reestablish the temperature and 
continue operations but later recorded readings of over 1,000° Fahrenheit and noticed the 
stack glowing red. The foreman manually shut-in the treater and all production after 
seeing its   condition. Investigations into this incident revealed multiple contributing factors 
with the installation of safety devices that were common in other heater treater incidents, 
such as: 
• Inadequate length of Temperature Safety High (TSH) safety device thermowells: 
The thermowells often did not extend into the media, leading to inaccurate 
temperature readings and the TSH not functioning as desired.  
SAFETY ALERT 
 
 
The TSH is not extended far enough into the heat 
media. As a result, the Temperature Indicator (TI) is 
unable to register a proper temperature. 
A Temperature Safety High (TSH) with Teflon tape on 
the threads. Teflon tape reduces the heat sink effect. 

A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the circumstances 
surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations that could assist avoiding potential 
incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf.  
 
• Improper installation of TSH safety devices, such as the use of Teflon tape during 
installation of a media device: The threads on the TSH are part of the heat sink 
process and Teflon tape reduces heat sink. 
• Inadequate length of a media Temperature Indicator (TI): When a TI remains inside 
a vessel’s nozzle and does not extend into the media, it   can lead to inaccurate 
temperature readings. 
• Partially plugged Flame and Stack Arrestors did not allow proper airflow or heat to 
escape. 
Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators and contractors consider the 
following:  
• Ensure the thermowells for the liquid media’s TSH and temperature 
indicator/gauges extend far enough past the vessel’s nozzle and into the media to 
get correct temperature readings; 
• Confirm that all safety devices and critical indicators are installed correctly prior to 
initial start-up; 
• Ensure safety devices, such as TSHs, are installed in accordance with 
manufacture recommendations and not with Teflon tape; 
• Verify that scheduled maintenance and inspections on safety devices are 
performed as required;   
• Consider inspecting flame arrestors and stack arrestor devices periodically and 
replacing them when damaged; and,   
• Consider inspecting and replacing TSH devices periodically to ensure proper 
temperature safety management of fired vessels. Note: This device generally 
cannot be field tested.  
--BSEE-- 
 
 
 
 
  