

 
SAFETY ALERT 
Contact: bseepublicaffairs@bsee.gov 
Phone: (800) 200-4853 
  
  
 
 
 
Overhaul Ball Crashes to Deck Resulting in High 
Potential,  Near-Miss Fatality 
 
While conducting crane operations during a 
decommissioning/well abandonment  
activity, a 700-pound crane headache ball fell 
24 feet,  crashing to the deck less than two feet 
from one of the riggers. The operator reported 
this high-potential, near-miss fatality to BSEE 
on Sept. 20, 2022.  
Incident details: 
• A crane was moving a 400-pound well 
cap (Figure 1) from one well access 
panel to an adjacent panel when a 
wedge socket on the auxiliary line 
snagged on the flange of a C-channel 
located at the edge of the platform’s rig 
deck.  
• The lift required running the crane’s 
auxiliary line within inches of the edge 
of the platform rig structure. the wedge 
socket above the headache ball 
snagging on the C-channel flange that 
ran across the length of the edge of the 
deck (Figure 2).  This snag temporarily 
held all the weight of the load and 
rigging, resulting in a false reading on 
the auxiliary winch. The load cell 
sending a weight signal to the operator 
was located below the snagged wedge 
socket. The crane operator did not 
detect that the auxiliary winch was no 
longer holding the weight of the load. 
  
 
Safety Alert No. 460 
March 10, 2023 
Figure 2. 
WEDGE 
SOCKET 
HEADACHE 
  
C-CHANNEL  
FLANGE ON 
C-   CHANNEL 
LOAD 
CELL 
Figure 1. 
WELL CAP 
400 LBS 

 
 
• (The “ blind lift,” was being directed by a rigger using radio communications. The 
rigger was standing on the pipe deck and had a clear view of the load, line, 
pedestal crane, and crane operator. His location put him approximately 30 feet 
from  
the load line.) 
• The rigger did not realize that the line had snagged on the C-channel and 
continued giving directions to keep lowering the well cap. As the load cell (which 
work by converting a specific type of mechanical force — typically tension, 
torque, compression, or pressure — into an output signal. This output signal is 
then transmitted via a load cable to the scale's indicator where the precise weight 
can be measured and read by the crane operator) was positioned below the 
snag, there was no change in the load signal, even though the weight of the load 
was now being supported by the C-channel and not the auxiliary winch.   
• The rigger, not seeing any movement, repeated a request to lower the load. 
Because the crane operator could not see the winch drum behind the crane cab, 
he did not see that the load was not moving and responded that he was still 
lowering the load.  As the crane operator continued to unwind the auxiliary line at 
the winch drum, the wedge socket slipped off the flange of the C-channel, 
releasing the snag (Figure 2).  The 700-pound headache ball fell 24 feet (Figure 
3), striking the deck less than two feet from one of the riggers guiding the load. 
(Figure 4).  After the incident, a third party inspected the crane, replaced a small 
three-inch pin for the hook latch, and the crane was placed back in service. 
 
 
WELL 
CAP  
400 LBS 
HEADACHE 
BALL 700 LBS  
Figure 3 
Figure 4 
CRANE 
OPERATOR 
RIGGERS GUIDING 
THE LOAD 
HEADACHE 
BALL 700 LBS  
WELL CAP 
400 LBS 
SNAG 
POINT 

 
 
Contributing Factors:  
 
• The rigger and crane operator should have noticed the auxiliary winch was no 
longer detecting the weight of the load.  
• The engineering controls (i.e., weight indicator) provided an inaccurate 
representation to the crane operator of weight on the winch due to wedge socket 
snagging on the flange of the C-   channel above the load cell.  
• The crane operator and rigger failed to recognize something was wrong after 
repeated requests asking to lower the load and receiving the response that the 
line was being lowered and not seeing any movement in the load position. 
 
• The rigger did not check the path of the auxiliary line for potential snags. 
• The work team should have noticed the potential hazards of working close to the 
C-   channel at the edge of the platform rig. The work team should have recognized 
the potential snag points. 
• No formal risk assessment was conducted. However, a review of the task was 
performed.  
 
Therefore, BSEE recommends operators and contractors consider  the following: 
 
• Ensure a secondary device (e.g., weight indicator, camera) is accessible to 
detect any slack on the load line.  
 
• Identify all potential wireline contact points and include them in worksite 
instructions, risk assessments, and toolbox talks. 
 
• When working close to  the equipment, and facility structures, identify potential 
contact and snag points and incorporate appropriate mitigation actions, including 
placing additional spotters at potential contact or snag points. 
 
• Discuss what key controls are in place to remove yourself and your team 
members from the potential “line of fire” (i.e., The zone within a work area where 
there is a risk of (serious) injury from machinery or equipment). 
 
• Ensure all operations and contract personnel involved in “lifting operations” 
attend and participate in a pre-job meeting/toolbox talk and document. 
 

 
 
o All workers should review the Job Safety Analysis (JSA) and ensure all 
hazards are acknowledged and policies /procedures, guidelines, 
contingencies, and communications are understood. 
 
• Incorporate load movement verification communications from rigger to crane 
operator (e.g., “down one foot,” “north one foot,” etc.) to ensure load line 
movement is confirmed throughout the lift and especially blind lifts.  
 
o Do a step-by-step visualization of the move to identify snag points,  
           mitigations, and critical communications, especially when tight clearance  
           cannot be avoided. 
 
• Conduct proper planning before lifts, such as reviewing the drop zones and 
identifying safe zones during the lift(s).  
 
 
 
– BSEE – 
 
 
A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations that 
could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
 
 
Category: Lifting  