

 
 
 
 
U.S. Department of the Interior 
Minerals Management Service 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MMS 
 Gulf of Mexico OCS Region
 Safety 
Alert 
Safety Alert No. 271 	Contact:  Glynn T. Breaux 
22 October 2008 	(504) 736 2560 
Motor Vessel to Platform Boat Landing Transfer Fatality 
 
A platform construction crew had been working in the East
 Cameron/West Cameron area for 
approximately three weeks. The Construction Crew Foreman (CCF) and Captain of the Motor 
Vessel (CMV) making the personnel transfer agreed to use a platform’s “condemned”  Southeast 
boat landing, since the active Southwest boat landing was too high to make a safe personnel 
transfer. Sea states at the time of the accident ranged from 7 to 10 feet. The CCF reached out to 
place his hand on the platform and his foot on the platform’s three foot diameter support pipe, 
but fell approximately four feet into the water. The M/V crewman and a construction crewman 
threw the CCF a rope, which the CCF placed around himself. Within five minutes the CCF was 
standing on the M/V’s deck while speaking/mumbling. Within the next three minutes the CCF 
collapsed and the M/V crew members began CPR. A medivac helicopter was dispatched and the 
CCF was flown to the nearest hospital, where the CCF was pronounced deceased.  
A Minerals Management Service (MMS) investigation into this accident revealed the following 
findings: 
•	 There was no company/operator representative present on the boat during this activity. 
•	 Testimony indicated that the CCF exhibited a sense of urgency to complete the job in 
order to meet a personal deadline. 
•	 A Stop Work Authority (SWA) was not utilized by all parties present;  
•	 Neither the CCF or CMV made any attempt to involve the Operator’s Platform Field 
Foreman in their decision to make the transfer. 
•	 The autopsy report indicated the cause of death to be hypertensive heart disease; 
•	 The autopsy report revealed that the CCF had two different prescription pain medications 
in his system at the time of the incident. 
•	 Contributing causes were reported from the autopsy report as blunt injuries, including 
abrasions, contusions and lacerations to the head and extremities, with a fracture of the 
left ninth rib. 
•	 Testimony  from  a  construction  crew  welder  indicated  that  he  was  not  aware  of  the 
operating company offering the crew members the opportunity to travel via helicopter 
from platform to platform. The welder also indicated that if the CCF had successfully 
boarded  the  platform,  the  remaining  construction  crew  members  would  have  also 
attempted the boarding.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
              
 
 
 
Therefore, the MMS makes the following recommendations: 
•	 Operators  should  maintain  adequate  oversight  of  contract  personnel  working  on  their 
locations. 
•	 Operators should perform an assessment of their facilities, for the purpose of identifying 
hazardous areas and safe means of access and egress, and communicate their policy prior 
to visitors arriving on location. 
•	 Operators should provide site specific orientations, for the purpose of revealing areas of 
concern, to all visitors arriving on their facilities. These orientations should be used to 
familiarize all with emergency procedures including, but not limited to, alarm location, 
activation, and recognition, fire fighting and lifesaving equipment’s location and use, and 
facility evacuation procedures, including muster locations and areas marked as hazardous 
or off limits. 
•	 Operators should remind all workers of the Operator’s Policy with respect to Stop Work 
Authority. 
•	 Operators should consider  removing swing ropes from condemned boat landings; 
•	 Operators are reminded that when personnel transfer by M/V to and from platforms, all 
personnel must utilize the assistance of a swing rope as well as a Coast Guard approved 
Personal Flotation Device (PFD). 
•	 Operators are reminded that pre-job planning and communications are crucial tools for 
the successful outcome of all job tasks. 
--MMS--GOMR--
www.gomr.mms.gov 