

 
 
 
Control Portable Electronic Device Use  
to Prevent Ignition Hazards Offshore 
 
Background:  
Recent Marine Minerals Administration inspections identified unsafe use of portable 
electronic devices (PEDs) – including pagers, cell phones, cameras, video equipment, and 
radios – in hazardous areas offshore.  
During one inspection, MMA observed a wireline operator using a cellphone on a mobile 
offshore drilling unit during active wireline operations. This use violated facility safety 
procedures and resulted in an Incident of Non-Compliance.   
In another inspection, MMA observed portable electronic devices that were not rated for 
hazardous locations in a Class 1, Division 2 hazardous area, and no hot work permit had 
been issued.  
MMA emphasizes the importance of not using cell phones and other portable electronic 
devices during active operations unless their use is authorized and controlled. Portable 
electronic devices that are not properly rated for hazardous locations can create ignition 
hazards and should not be used without proper safeguards.  
Therefore, MMA recommends that operators and their contractors, where appropriate, 
consider the following:  
• Prohibit portable electronic device use in hazardous areas unless devices are 
certified as intrinsically safe
1
 for the applicable class and division.   
• Reinforce adherence to portable electronic device policies during facility 
orientations, and prior to safety-critical operations.  
 
1
 Intrinsically Safe: A method of protection in which electrical equipment is designed so that any spark or thermal effect produced under normal 
or fault conditions is incapable of igniting a specified flammable gas or vapor mixture. Intrinsically safe equipment is evaluated and certified for 
use in specific hazardous (classified) locations based on the applicable Class, Division, and Gas Group, in accordance with ANSI/UL 913 and the 
National Electrical Code (NEC) Article 504. For offshore applications, refer to API RP 14F for guidance on the selection and installation of 
electrical equipment in classified areas. 
Safety Alert No. 521 
Date: August 12, 2026 
Contact: Engagement@bsee.gov 
Phone: (800) 200-4853 

CAT EG O RY:   Dynamic Positioning 
 
• Require Hot Work Permits when portable electronic device use cannot be 
avoided in hazardous areas, consistent with API RP 14F (§12.3 and §12.9) and 
API 500.  
• Review company policies for portable electronic device usage and ensure they 
comply with 30 CFR 250.114 and API 14F standards. 
• Ensure offshore installation managers and company representatives understand 
hazardous area classification, portable electronic device ignition hazards, and 
proper installation and operating permit requirements.  
–   MMA – 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As of July 10, 2026, the Department of Interior has reunified the Bureau of Ocean Energy 
Management and the Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement into the Marine 
Minerals Administration, which will oversee the responsible development of the nation’s   
offshore energy and marine mineral resources with an integrated focus on safety, 
environmental protection and efficient oversight. For more information, visit  
Transition to the Marine Minerals Administration | U.S. Department of the Interior. 
 
 A Safety Alert is a tool used by MMA to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the circumstances 
surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations that could assist in avoiding potential 
incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf.  