

 
Safety Alert No. 387                               Contact: Jason Mathews 
June 1, 2020                                      Phone: (504) 731-1496 
 
 
 Chemical Blockage Leads to Fire Extinguisher Failure
  
 
                                                              
In  January 2020, a wheeled fire extinguisher failed to operate because of a blockage in the 
siphon tubing line. This failure resulted in two personnel requiring medical evaluation and 
led to a delay in extinguishing a fire.  
       
                                                                              
An investigation of the fire extinguisher failure found that the device pressured up as 
intended, but the moisture disc did not rupture. The siphon tube had become packed with 
chemical, which prevented the chemical from flowing out of the hose. Records showed 
that the fire extinguisher was last inspected on December 1, 2019, but it   did not include 
the manufacturer’s recommendation to clear the siphon tube and check the powder.  
One contributing factor to the blockage in the siphon tube was the proximity of the fire 
extinguisher to a compressor. The vibration of a compressor or other vibrating equipment 
can cause chemical to navigate up a fire extinguisher’s siphon tube and become packed.  
SAFETY ALERT 
 
 
Example of a wheeled fire extinguisher 
Example of a 
blockage in a siphon 
 

A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations 
that could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
 
Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators and contractors consider the 
following: 
 
•    Follow manufacturer recommendations when performing annual fire extinguisher 
maintenance;  
•    Clear a fire extinguisher’s siphon tube of chemical during annual inspection to 
prevent packing; 
•    Consider exchanging fire extinguishers when performing annual inspections or 
maintenance if clearing the siphon tube on the facility is not reasonable due to its 
humid atmosphere or the possible contamination of the chemical; and, 
•    Account for equipment vibration when placing fire extinguishers throughout a facility. 
  
--BSEE-- 