

 
SAFETY ALERT 
Contact: bseepublicaffairs@bsee.gov 
Phone: (800) 200-4853 
  
  
 
 
 
BSEE Investigates Incidents Related to Working in Confined 
Spaces 
       
  
 
In recent months, the Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement (BSEE) has 
observed a trend of safety incidents that occurred while personnel conducted tank 
cleaning operations in confined spaces.  
Incident 1: Required CPR 
The first incident occurred while a worker was vacuuming, and the nozzle became stuck 
inside the tank. To free the nozzle, the worker—who was wearing a respirator with 
organic filters specifically used for working outside the tank—fully entered the tank, 
where he fell ill. Coworkers found the worker inside the tank lying under the fluid. 
Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation (CPR) was administered to revive the worker. 
A comprehensive investigation revealed: 
• Stop Work Authority (SWA)
1
 was not invoked, which is a deviation from standard 
safety protocols.  
 
1
 SWA gives workers and contractors the authority and responsibility to stop work if they observe unsafe 
conditions or behaviors on the jobsite. 
  
 
Safety Alert No. 477 
Dec. 13, 2023 
Figure 1. Heater-Treater Injured Party Entered. 
Figure 2. Tank Injured Party Entered. 

 
 
• There was non-compliance with the company’s confined space entry policies.  
In addition to procedural lapses, a significant contributing factor to the incident was 
human behavior. Specifically, it was noted that an employee felt compelled to rush, 
leading to hasty and ill-informed decisions. This haste ultimately led to unauthorized 
and unplanned entry into the tank, further exacerbating the situation. 
Corrective actions to be implemented include:  
• Providing additional refresher training for confined space rescue.  
• Invoking safety stand downs.  
• Installing X-Brace on manways for personnel barrier. 
• Ensuring management meets with supervisors to go over policies and 
procedures before every job.  
Incident 2: Experience Near-S yncope 
In another incident, a worker began to feel ill while conducting tank cleaning operations 
and attempted to exit the tank. While exiting, the worker experienced a near-syncope 
episode (Near-syncope is feeling like one is going to pass out but without actual loss of 
consciousness).   The worker initially appeared alert but was slow to answer questions, 
was sweating profusely,  and then collapsed. A coworker revived the worker using CPR. 
The worker was flown to shore, and medical evaluation showed the worker had non-
stress-induced cardiac arrythmia that may have contributed to the near-syncope 
episode.  
OSHA Requirements 
The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) website lists the hazards 
associated with oil and gas storage tanks, including: 
• Fire 
• Asphyxiation 
• Falls 
• Death/injury  
•    Entrapment 
OSHA provides requirements for working in confined spaces under 29 CFR § 1910.146. 
The American Petroleum Institute and the National Fire Protection Association have 
developed standards for tank cleaning operations.  

 
 
BSEE recommends that operators and their contractors, where appropriate, 
consider: 
• Ensuring all personnel understand what constitutes a confined space and 
confined space entry. Ensuring personnel are aware that confined spaces may 
be hazardous even if part of the body remains outside of the space. 
• Ensuring a Job Safety Analysis (JSA) is in place and is discussed prior to starting 
work. Completing, if required, a confined space entry work permit, which should 
explain the hazards and mitigations common to confined space work. 
• Stopping the job and discussing/analyzing any potential safety and 
environmental hazards, and renewing approval before proceeding when 
deviating from the JSA and/or permit. 
• Ensuring the proper personal protective equipment (PPE) is worn.  
• Ensuring others know of your planned activities and the duration of the planned 
activities prior to entering a confined space.  
 
• Ensuring personnel inside the confined space have means to communicate with 
personnel outside. Regular communication can be used to detect if the personnel 
inside have become impaired. 
 
• Ensuring proper ventilation prior to entering a confined space. If proper 
ventilation cannot be achieved, utilizing the necessary breathing apparatus.  
• Developing a rescue plan for extracting personnel who are unable to exit a 
confined space due to injury or incapacitation. Identifying the personnel who will 
execute the rescue plan and the equipment that will be used. 
 
• Ensuring employees and/or contractors have the proper training to clean in an 
enclosed space. Also ensuring the training is current and up to date.  
• Clearly marking the storage tanks regarding the substance contained and any 
associated hazards (flammability, reactivity, health hazards, etc.).  
• Keeping Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDS) for all substances found on 
location in an easily accessible area, including chemicals in the storage tanks. 

 
 
• Ensuring all personnel are made aware of their duty and responsibility of utilizing 
SWA with the full support of their supervisor and management. 
 
– BSEE – 
 
 
A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations that 
could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
 
 
Category: Personnel Safety  