

 
 
 
 
 
U.S. Department of the Interior 
Minerals Management Service 
Gulf of M
exico OCS Region
o. 266 	
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
                                                             
       
    
 
MMS 
 Safety 
Alert 
Safety Alert NContact:  Glynn T. Breaux 
23 September 2008 	(504) 736 2560 
Trouble Shooting Production Platform Upset Problems 
Recently, a small flash fire occurred when condensate carried over into a platform’s flare scrubber due to 
a  malfunction  of  the  Low  Pressure  Separator  Level  Safety  High  (LSH).  Operating  personnel  were 
attempting to restore production, but were unable to do so when they could not locate the appropriate 
production vessel’s first out indicator to correct the problem. The platform was shut-in by a LSH on the 
wet oil tank. A hydrocarbon mist was observed coming from the flare scrubber vent, and the wind blew 
the  mist  back  to  the  generator’s  hot  exhaust  piping  igniting  the  mist.  The  flash  fire  was  quickly 
extinguished utilizing one handheld fire extinguisher. No personnel were injured, no pollution occurred, 
and the only damage resulted in scorched paint on the top of the generator. 
The investigation revealed that a malfunction of the Low Pressure Separator LSH allowed condensate to 
carry over into the flare scrubber. The flare scrubber filled with fluid and the discharged hydrocarbon was 
wind-blown to the generator’s hot exhaust piping resulting in a flash fire. 
Therefore, MMS recommends the following: 
•	 When restoring platform production, trouble-shoot possible LSH set point problems on upstream 
production vessels.   
•	 Clean the sight glasses on all vessels in order to clearly verify fluid levels. 
•	 When  trouble  shooting  upset  problems  on  production  platforms,  closely  monitor  fluid 
accumulation in the flare scrubber. Fluid levels can be confirmed with use of an effective sight 
glass. 
•	 Relocation of flare piping may be required in order to vent away from ignition sources. 
•	 Operators are to be reminded that only the minimum number of safety devices shall be taken out 
of service when returning the platform to production following an upset. 
--MMS--GOMR--
www.gomr.mms.gov 