

Safety Alert No. 413                         Contact: Jason Mathews 
February 24, 2021                     Phone: (504) 731-1496 
Hazards Identified in Level  I Surveys not Communicated to 
Affected Personnel 
Figure 1- Helideck structural support 
bracings in poor condition 
Figure 2- Collapsed 
helideck skirting 
Figure 3- Unsecured grating bracings in 
poor condition 
BSEE inspectors have observed severe corrosion and metal degradation across various 
facilities on multiple occasions recently. After further investigation onsite of each asset, 
BSEE inspectors have determined that company and contract personnel conducting 
regulatory-required inspections of their dedicated platforms are unaware of the potential 
hazards that have been identified in previous Level I Surveys. These surveys consist of a 
comprehensive assessment of the condition of the topside decks as it pertains to structural 
integrity. 
In April 2020, during a BSEE inspection, a section of helideck skirting collapsed onto the 
handrail of the walkway leading to the helideck (figure 2). There were no injuries. The loss 
of integrity of the safety net attachment points was identified in a 2019 Level I Survey. 
However, platform personnel were not informed of the results of the survey, which put them 
in a    potentially hazardous situation. The    helideck was put out-of-service (OOS), and a 
Notice to Airmen (NOTAM) was issued. 
In June 2020, BSEE inspectors were inspecting an OOS facility when they discovered 
unsecured grating over a well on the well deck (figure 3). The hazardous condition was not 
communicated to the BSEE inspectors because the platform personnel visiting the facility 
every month were not aware of hazards identified in the Level I Survey completed almost 
10 months prior. 
SAFETY ALERT 

A Safety Alertis a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations 
that could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf.
                                                                               Category: Personnel Safety, Structural
That same month, BSEE inspectors found multiple unbarricaded corrosion issues 
throughout the facility, including helideck structural support bracings in poor condition 
(figure 1). The inspectors requested the previously completed Level I Surveys and found 
that the surveys from the prior two years described the helicopter bracing in poor structural 
condition and listed other   hazards throughout the facility.   These findings had not been 
addressed or even communicated to the personnel regularly boarding the platform. The 
helideck was put OOS and a NOTAM was issued. 
Therefore, BSEE recommends that Operators consider the following: 
· Incorporate a system for disseminating any findings stemming from Level I 
Surveys or similar reviews to personnel who visit those facilities. 
· Review every completed Level I Survey and address all issues noted. Prioritize 
and track structural concerns to closure via a Quality Assurance/Mechanical 
Integrity work order system. 
· Clearly mark boat landings and helidecks OOS if the Level I Survey identifies these 
areas to have compromised structural integrity. 
· Properly barricade all hazards identified in the Level I survey, such as corroded 
grating, handrails, stairways, etc., if repairs cannot be completed immediately. 
--BSEE-- 