

Contact: bseepublicaffairs@bsee.gov 
Phone: (800) 200-4853 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
BSEE Identifies Dropped Object Hazards During  
Risk-Based Inspections 
    
                                     Crane lifting a bundle of drill pipe while BSEE engineer observes the activity. 
 
A recent data analysis pointed to risks associated with dropped objects on both 
production and well operations. During the time frame reviewed, multiple high potential 
incidents related to lifting equipment (cranes, elevators, top drives, pipe racking 
systems, etc.) occurred throughout the GOMR. BSEE developed a unique inspection 
protocol that focused on reducing the likelihood of similar incidents and compliance 
issues Gulf-wide. After the inspections, BSEE concluded: 
• The majority of inspected production facilities did not have an implemented 
dropped object prevention program. However, deep-water drilling rigs did appear 
to have programs in place that identified and mitigated hazards associated with 
objects that have the potential to fall from height.  
• Most of the facilities inspected had some version of a Hazard Hunt, but only a 
limited portion focused on the potential of dropped objects. Additionally, BSEE 
found little documentation for most Hazard Hunts and observed that previous 
Hazard Hunts did not include hazards identified by BSEE during these 
inspections.  
• BSEE identified good practices of barrier management while lifts were taking 
place and in the presence of moving equipment on the rig floor. On lifts not 
associated with the rig floor and work above decks on production facilities, 
restricted access areas need improvement. 
  
 
Safety Alert No. 426 
September 14, 2021  
SAFETY ALERT 
 
 

• The majority of operators did not have specific training requirements to prevent 
dropped objects for the offshore personnel at the facilities.  
• Job Safety Analyses (JSAs) were completed; however, BSEE identified multiple 
gaps that need improvement. For example, JSAs were not conducted at the 
worksite to visually inspect for hazards; JSAs had pre-printed text without further 
analysis; and JSAs with lifts, e.g., Pick-up Pipe from V-door, completely negated 
the potential for dropped object potential. 
• On those applicable facilities, offshore personnel were aware of the hazards 
associated with pipe handling. Most of the contractors had programs to ensure a 
correctly sized tubular running system. 
• Multiple good practices were in place with the coordination and lifting of. These 
included communication with shore bases and platforms, color and shape 
marking labels, assessment of slings and rigging in pre-use inspections, and pre-
lift inspections of cargo (container, tubulars, or other loads). 
• All inspected facilities had a Management of Change (MOC) program; however, 
no recent MOCs (in the last six months) encompassed mounting new fixtures to 
existing structures or equipment, including additional secondary securing 
methods or installing new equipment at height. 
Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators and contractors consider: 
• Reviewing the inspection results and use them as a basis for conducting focused 
Hazard Hunts on their facilities to reduce the likelihood of similar incidents. 
• Developing a Prevention of Dropped Objects strategy and action plan to identify 
and assess individual work areas and activities for dropped object potential.  
• Establishing regular inspection frequencies for identifying any potential dropped 
objects and record the results within a work order register.  
• Developing standalone training requirements for those individuals exposed to or 
undertaking the inspection of potential dropped objects. 
• Evaluating all lifting JSAs to ensure they address the control of objects with the 
potential to fall. 
• Ensuring all new equipment or structures added to their facilities trigger the MOC 
process to address newly introduced hazards resulting from the change. 
 
− BSEE −  
 
 
 
 
A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations that 
could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
 
 
Category: General, Dropped Objects, Lifting  