

 
Safety Alert No. 404                           Contact: Susan Dwarnick      
November 23, 2020                        Phone: (703) 342-2480 
 
 
BSEE Establishes Goal to Reduce Lifting Incidents by 50% 
 
                                                              
Lifting incidents are consistently the most frequently reported incident type (Figure 1) by 
Oil and Gas operators on the Outer Continental Shelf (OCS), with approximately 22% of 
the total number of reported incidents classified as crane/or lifting incidents.  
Approximately 50% of all reported lifting incidents from 2014-2018 were comprised of a 
load strike, less than 10% resulted in personal injury, and approximately 86% of reported 
lifting injuries involved contractors. Since May 2020, every lifting incident reported to 
BSEE has involved a segment of the Operator's contracted workforce. 
  
 
* reported lifting and crane incidents in TIMS database. 
Figure 1. Count of Lifting Incidents Fiscal Year (FY) 2014 – 2020 
 
All lifting incidents create the potential for injury and significant environmental and/or safety 
impact. Accordingly, in March 2020, BSEE Director Scott Angelle issued a challenge to a 
select group of engineers, inspectors, and supervisors within BSEE’s district, regional, and 
HQ offices to identify potential immediate and longer-term actions that could be considered 
0
50
100
150
200
250
FY2014FY2015FY2016FY2017FY2018FY2019FY2020
Count of Lifting Incidents*
Lifting Incidents are the most frequently reported offshore incident
SAFETY ALERT 
 
 

A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations 
that could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
Categories: Cranes/Lifting; SEMS 
 
by BSEE and industry as mitigation measures for reducing the occurrences and severity of 
future lifting incidents by the target goal of 50%.   
 
This Safe Lifting Initiative Team has observed that most reported lifting incidents include a 
human component contributing to the event. This observation is supported by the findings 
from  the  ABS  Crane Safety  Assessment  (2015), which  reported  that  60% to  80% of  the 
mishaps involved human errors. Therefore, BSEE will seek to employ SEMS methodology 
to identify specific  programs  or  standard  operating  procedures to drive  improvements  in 
lifting safety performance.   
 
Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators and contractors consider the 
following: 
• Improving pre-work planning- Pre-work planning may not reflect the dynamics of 
reality for the workplace and should be improved beyond completing a Job Safety 
Analysis (JSA). The majority (>80%) of the lifting incidents occurred during 
operations described as “routine” by the operator. Primary SEMS Elements: Safe 
Work Practices, Hazard Analysis and Recognition. 
• Obtaining better data on lifting incident causal factors- Incident data must be 
collected with the goal of identifying the undesirable circumstances and behaviors 
to mitigate future occurrences. Primary SEMS Elements: Investigation of 
Incidents, Safe Work Practices. 
• Identifying/Creating Training Opportunities- Rigger position training has been 
identified as critical to improving safe work practices. Since most lifting incidents 
involve a human element, training should include recognition of human factors and 
the ability to recognize and mitigate hazards. Primary SEMS Elements: Training, 
Safe Work Practices, Hazards Analysis and Recognition. 
 
BSEE is asking for everyone working on the OCS to join this initiative and help us drive 
change and reduce lifting incidents by 50% in 2021. Count us in!   
Learn more about #RLI50%B21: https://www.bsee.gov/what-we-do/offshore-regulatory-
programs/offshore-safety-improvement/inspection-programs/reducing-lifting-incidents-by-
50 
 
--BSEE-- 