

MMS 
 
 
 
 
 U.S. Department of the Interior 
 Minerals Management Service 
 Gulf of Mexico OCS Region 
        Safety  
             Alert 
Safety Alert No. 265  Contact:  Angie Gobert
9 July 2008 (504) 736-2876
 
Pipeline Ruptures – 870 Barrels of Crude Oil Spilled   
 
Recently a 14-inch interstate crude oil pipeline was severed by a vessel anchor resulting in a spill 
of approximately 870 barrels. 
 
A Minerals Management Service (MMS) investigation into the circumstances of this spill 
concluded that: 
 
  1.  Though the pipeline right-of-way (ROW) holder, at a remote location, was alerted by 
various alarms and significant pressure change information, the holder chose neither to shut in 
the severed pipeline remotely nor contact the platform operator to manually shut in. 
  
2.  The pipeline did not automatically shut in because the pressure safety low (PSL) 
sensor was set well below the lower limit of the normal operating pressure. 
 
3.  The pressure safety high and low sensor (PSHL) on the departing pipeline, the severed 
pipeline, was not connected to the shut down valves (SDVs) on the two incoming pipelines. 
 
4.  The SDV’s on the two incoming pipelines would not have shut in the pipelines 
because they were improperly located on one of the two branches rather than on the pipeline 
before the branch.  Additionally, these pipeline SDVs were not located immediately upon 
boarding the platform. 
 
5.  The SDVs on the two incoming pipelines were being used to divert the flow of the 
product through pig traps.  
 
These multiple factors contributed to an increased volume of oil, approximately 520 barrels, 
being spilled into the Gulf of Mexico.  Had the severed pipeline been shut in expeditiously, as it 
could have been if the safety system (including the safety devices) functioned as designed and 
required, and if appropriate decisions had been made, a smaller volume of approximately 350 
barrels of oil would have spilled. 
    

The MMS recommends that pipeline ROW holders and lessees and operators consider 
establishing agreements and a communication protocol to ensure that on-site personnel are able 
to respond to pipeline emergencies. 
   
The MMS reminds pipeline ROW holders and lessees and operators of the following regulatory 
requirements: 
   
• In accordance with 30 CFR 250.1004(b)(3), departing pipelines receiving production 
from production facilities shall be protected by high- and low-pressure sensors (PSHL) to 
directly or indirectly shut in all production facilities.  The PSHL shall be set not to exceed 
15 percent above and below the normal operating pressure range.  However, high pilots 
shall not be set above the pipeline’s MAOP. 
 
• In accordance with 30 CFR 250.1004(b)(4), crossing pipelines on production or manned 
nonproduction platforms which do not receive production from the platform shall be 
equipped with an SDV immediately upon boarding the platform.  The SDV shall be 
operated by a PSHL on the departing pipelines and connected to the platform automatic- 
and remote-emergency shut in systems. 
 
• In accordance with 30 CFR 250.1004(b)(1)(i), all incoming pipelines to a platform shall 
be equipped with a flow safety valve (FSV).  In accordance with 30 CFR 250.1004(b)(2), 
incoming pipelines boarding a production platform shall be equipped with an automatic 
shutdown valve immediately upon boarding the platform.  The SDV shall be connected to 
the automatic- and remote-emergency shut in systems. 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
—MMS—GOMR— 
www.gomr.mms.gov
 
 
 
              
 
 
 