

 
SAFETY ALERT 
Contact: bseepublicaffairs@bsee.gov 
Phone: (800) 200-4853 
  
  
 
 
Adaptation and Modification of Tool Results in Injury 
A worker was recently 
injured while attempting 
to install a hydraulic 
line on a pipe handling 
machine during 
offshore energy 
operations. The worker 
determined the 
combination wrench on 
hand was too long for 
this particular use and 
attempted to alter the 
tool by placing the 
wrench into a vice to 
manually shorten the length by using hacksaw. During the wrench alteration process, 
the worker cut a gloved hand with the sharp edge of the altered wrench handle, 
resulting in a laceration requiring sutures. 
 
Upon investigating the incident, the operator’s Incident Investigation Team identified the 
following causal factors: 
 
• The worker did not pause or stop work to consult with a supervisor when the job 
scope changed and/or the proper tool was unavailable. The decision to modify the 
combination wrench was not discussed with the supervisor before modifying the tool.  
 
• The worker did not explore the potential for other avenues and/or options for locating 
the proper tools (i.e., checking with other work groups). 
 
• A proper wrench that would fit in the tight area was not readily available on the rig 
floor. 
• When the worker decided to alter the hand tool, the the worker chose a readily 
available hand saw versus a more appropriate/potentially safer method, i.e. a 
bandsaw. 
 
After the incident, the operator and rig manager implemented corrective actions to 
prevent similar incidents from happening in the future. The actions include: 
 
• Rig    managers will order close radius hand tools. 
  
 
Safety Alert No. 463 
May 16, 2023 
Wrench in vise with hacksaw. 
Modified wrench. 

 
 
• Rig managers will conduct a high-level overview of the incident with all 
crewmembers onboard to emphasize the importance of proper pre-job planning 
and hazard assessment. 
 
• Rig managers will stress the importance of any lone worker applying the option to 
ask for assistance when reviewing a hazard identification and mitigation card / 
compass card. 
 
• Rig managers will set expectations to all crew members that the alteration of 
Original Equipment Manufaturer (OEM) tools, equipment, etc. is unacceptable 
and discuss potential consequences. 
 
BSEE Review:  
The operator’s incident report stated that prior to modifying the hand tool, the worker 
reviewed a hazard identification and mitigation card / compass card. However, there 
was no apparent findings that the worker potentially used the compass card to 
circumvent the requirement of modifying the Job Safety Analysis when the scope of the 
job changed.   
Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators and their contractors consider the 
following (where appropriate): 
• Reviewing safety alerts   with all relevant employees. 
 
• Reviewing the corrective actions implemented by the operator. 
 
• Ensuring proper tools are available. 
 
• Reviewing all Hazard Analysis policies and procedures to ensure hazard 
identification and mitigation card / compass card is utilized and understood and 
used to circumvent the regulatory requirements of 30 CFR 250.1911. 
– BSEE – 
 
 
 
A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It   also contains recommendations that 
could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
 
 
Category: Personnel Safety, Hand Injuries, PPE  