

 
SAFETY ALERT 
Contact: bseepublicaffairs@bsee.gov 
Phone: (800) 200-4853 
  
  
 
 
 
BSEE Alerts Offshore Workers to Trend of Recurring Hand 
Injuries While Using Alternative Cutting Devices 
The Bureau of Safety   and Environmental Enforcement (BSEE) has observed a trend of 
safety incidents related to improper use of alternative cutting devices. When using any 
alternative cutting device, it is critical to follow safe work practices to prevent worker 
injury or damage to property. Misuse of these alternative cutting devices often leads to 
injury, emphasizing the need for future continuous vigilance and strict adherence to 
safety protocols. Alternative cutting devices that have been damaged or altered should 
be discarded. BSEE is informing workers and providing recommendations to help 
prevent future injuries. 
 
Recent incidents include the following:   
Incident 1: While running a new cable in a cable tray, an offshore worker was using a 
cutter to remove previously installed zip ties. Although the protective tip of the cutter was 
damaged, exposing the blade, the offshore worker continued to use the damaged cutting 
device. The exposed blade cut through the worker’s glove, causing a laceration on the 
left hand between the thumb and index finger (Figure 1). 
 
Incident 2:  An offshore worker sustained a laceration to the back of their hand, between 
the thumb and index finger, while cutting zip ties. The incident occurred when the cutting 
device rebounded, causing the injury. It was found that the protective guard over the blade 
was missing, leaving the blade exposed (Figure 2).
                 
 
  
 
Safety Alert No. 487 
September 3, 2024 
Figure 1 - Damaged alternative cutting device and 
cut glove. 
Figure 2 - Exposed blade on alternative cutting 
device. 

 
 
BSEE recommends that operators and their contractors, where appropriate, 
consider doing the following: 
• Ensure all personnel identify the appropriate alternative cutting device in the Job 
Safety Analysis for the assigned task.  
• Inspect the alternative cutting device before use to confirm that the protective 
shielding is free from wear or chips and that it is properly installed. 
• Ensure personnel do not alter or modify alternative cutting devices before use. 
• Ensure personnel use cut resistant gloves for added protection when utilizing 
alternative cutting devices.  
• Ensure that if the alternative cutting device is defective in any way, the cutting 
device is    discarded appropriately. 
 
– BSEE – 
 
 
A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations that 
could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
 
 
Category: Hand Injury 