

U.S. Department of the Interior
Minerals Management Service
Gulf of Mexico OCS Region
Safety Alert No. 229
4 April 2005
Contact:Glenn Woltman
(504) 736-2438
Inadequate Job Planning Results in Atmospheric Release of Gas
Failure to isolate the energy source during platform maintenance work allowed gas tomigrate from the
sales pipeline back through production equipment resulting in the total evacuation ofgas to the
atmosphere from a 30-inch pipeline.  The incident occurred after pipeline personnel had closed their
sales and riser valves at the platform and bled the system down for valve maintenancework.  Later
during the day, production personnel decided to re-pressure the platform system to move condensate
built up in the vessels down the pipeline.  As the system pressure was increasing, valves off the
condensate coalescer began to leak.  Gas started blowing back through the dump line and out the flare
boom while personnel began removing the leaking valves.  Personnel were ordered to evacuate.  Gas
continued to migrate from the sales pipeline back through the production train, eventually escaping
through the open-ended piping at the coalescer over the next 32 hours until such timeas the pipeline
had essentially been bled off.  At that time, pipeline personnel were able to board the platform and
close the manual sales valve, effectively isolating the energy source.
MMS concluded that (1) failure to develop a detailed written procedure (JSA) for thework to be
performed prevented personnel from identifying and properly isolating the energy source, and (2)   the
lack of communications between pipeline and production personnel, coupled with the failure to utilize
the company’s stop work authority policy, allowed critical warning signs leading up to the incident to be
overlooked, and (3) failure to use lock-out/tag-out procedures to properly isolate the production
equipment and process piping indirectly resulted in the mishap.
The MMS recommends the following:
·Supervisors must provide adequate job instructions and planning prior to the work.
·Hazards must be identified as work proceeds, and a “stop work policy” in place as thejob
scope changes.
·Personnel must be familiar with and utilize lock-out and tag-out procedures to isolate equipment
and process piping during work programs.
·Simultaneous operations must be clearly communicated to all appropriate parties, detailing all
site-specific procedures prior to work being implemented.
An investigation of this incident has been conducted, and the report is available onthe MMS website:
http://www.gomr.mms.gov/homepg/offshore/safety/acc_repo/districtreports.html
  —MMS—GOMR—
www.gomr.mms.gov
Visit our Safety Information Website
Inadequate Job Planning Results in Atmospheric Release of Gashttp://www.gomr.boemre.gov/homepg/offshore/safety/safealt/SA_229...
1 of 12/21/2012 4:44 PM