

   
 
   
 
 
Safety Alert No. 398                             Contact: Jason Mathews 
October 5, 2020                              Phone: (504) 731-1496 
 
 
Lifeboat Failures and Damage Occur During Maintenance 
 
       
             
 
 
In March 2020, two incidents in the Gulf of Mexico involved damage to lifeboats during 
testing and inspection. Both lifeboats were later secured, and no personnel were injured. 
The details of each incident are provided below: 
 
• As a life capsule was lowered during a dynamic load test after routine 
maintenance, the lifeboat reached its required level above the waterline and the 
brake was applied. However, the brake failed to provide any stopping capability 
and the life capsule fell into the Gulf of Mexico. The initial attempt to retrieve the 
lifeboat was unsuccessful because the winch failed to hold the load, but the 
lifeboat was eventually recovered when a work boat arrived on site.  
 
• Facility personnel were in the process of lowering a lifeboat as part of its regular 
monthly inspection when the lifeboat swung and contacted the platform. The life 
capsule’s gripe plate struck the side of the gripe pin, causing the gripe plate to be 
partially removed from the lifeboat’s    hull. Personnel later assessed the situation 
and ensured that the lifeboat was secured in its davit. 
 
  
SAFETY ALERT 
 
 
Lifeboat gripe plate after contacting a platform        
Lifeboat in the water after an inadvertent descent               

   
 
A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations 
that could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
 
Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators consider the following: 
 
• Conduct routine lifeboat maintenance at frequencies required by the Quality 
Assurance/Quality Control/Mechanical Integrity programs in place;  
o Programs should be designed and implemented to fully satisfy all applicable 
Coast Guard type-approval, maintenance, testing and drilling requirements. 
They should also include all Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM) 
recommended maintenance procedures and timelines. The Coast Guard 
recommends using Navigation and Vessel Inspection Circular (NVIC) 03-19
 
and its enclosures.  
 
• Review the scope of work carefully with contractors before commencing work and 
verify that contractors conducting maintenance activities are properly performing 
their duties safely and are following the agreed work plan; 
• Ensure compliance of third-party servicing and inspections with all applicable 
regulations and scrutinize servicing to confirm that service provision supports those 
requirements. Special consideration should be given to all recommendations 
resulting from a third-party;  
• Consider implementing a testing and verification plan after any work is    done on 
latches and winches and before any personnel are allowed in the capsules;  
• Thoroughly inspect a lifeboat’s winches, latches, brake pads, and control cables 
prior to permitting personnel to enter a lifeboat to conduct maintenance;  
• Consider the use of maintenance pendants to mitigate risk while entering lifeboats 
for servicing and inspections and consult OEM for guidance on appropriate 
selections and use of maintenance pendants;  
• Review load test procedures for accuracy on an interval established in your SEMS 
program and as required by applicable Coast Guard regulations; 
• Consider current environmental conditions (i.e. wind speed, wave height, etc.) in 
the Job Safety Analysis when lowering and/or launching a lifeboat for testing or 
drills and contact the Coast Guard Eighth District Outer Continental Shelf
 Officer in 
Charge, Marine Inspection for further guidance on lifeboat launching requirements 
and alternatives; 
•    Replace launch cables, brake pads/shoes, and centrifugal brakes every five years 
as per typical offshore lifeboat OEM recommended inspection guidelines; and, 
•    Ensure that any modification to a Coast Guard-approved system (e.g. boat, davit, 
releasing gear system, winch, etc.) has been approved by the Coast Guard prior to 
placing the life-saving equipment in service. 