

 
SAFETY ALERT 
Contact: bseepublicaffairs@bsee.gov 
Phone: 800-200-4853 
  
   
 
 
 
 
Improper Use and Application of High-Pressure Hoses  
Can Cause Injuries  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
During a recent offshore inspection, a BSEE inspector observed operator personnel installing a 
100-foot high-pressure hose, with a Maximum Working Pressure (MWP) of 5000 psi, to test 
pressure safety valves on pipeline pumps. The hose used was designed for hydraulic fluid and 
not suitable for high-pressure nitrogen; when nitrogen gas at 2500 psi was injected into the 
hydraulic hose, the hose blistered, allowing nitrogen gas to leak.  
 
BSEE recommends operators and their contractors, where appropriate, consider: 
• Selecting hoses based on size, temperature, application, material to be conveyed, 
pressure, ends or couplings, and delivery. 
 
• Sizing the inside diameter (I.D.) and outside diameter (O.D.) appropriately to minimize 
pressure loss and reduce heat generation.  
 
• Choosing the appropriate hose size to match the new hose I.D. and O.D. with the 
layline (information listed on the side of the hose) or referencing the original equipment 
manufacturer (OEM) for specifications of the equipment requiring the hose.  
 
• Ensuring the operating temperature of the hose is similar in temperature to the fluid and 
ambient temperatures. Both high and low temperatures can have a significant effect on 
the efficiency, performance, and safety of the hose. Also, check for hot surfaces or hot 
exhaust in the area where the hose will be installed and consider rerouting the hose if a 
heat shield cannot be installed.  
  
 
Safety Alert No. 465 
June 29, 2023 
Incompatible hydraulic hose blistered during use. 
Hose layline with application information. 

 
 
 
• Reviewing the safety data sheet (SDS) for the proper fluid type to be conveyed.  
 
• Checking for compatibility between the fluid and the hose materials, along with 
connections, couplings, and O-rings.  
 
• Following manufacturer recommendations for hose inspection and replacement 
intervals. Frequent fluctuations in pressure and poor storage conditions may reduce 
hose life; consider these variations when determining replacement intervals for 
preventative maintenance programs. 
 
• Immediately stopping usage or replacing hoses when they become damaged, cracked, 
cut, abraded, blistered, soft, kinked, crushed, flattened, or twisted.  
 
• Always properly marking discontinued service hoses for disposal and storing them 
separately from new service hoses.  
 
• Ensuring work permits and job safety analyses address the risks involved in working 
closely with pressurized hoses.  
 
• Notifying personnel of the hazards of working around pressurized hoses and installing 
warnings and barriers.  
 
• Reviewing BSEE Safety Alert 442 for additional recommendations concerning personal 
protective equipment (PPE), depressurizing lines, use of whip checks, valve positioning, 
and use of Stop Work Authority around hoses.  
 
• Reviewing BSEE District Investigation 05-19-2022 for recommendations concerning 
failures in the general work permit and hazard identification processes, insufficient hose 
inspection and maintenance programs, and insufficient communication of hazards 
involving hoses.  
 
– BSEE – 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations that 
could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
 
 
Category: Personnel Safety, Hand Injuries, PPE  