Safety Alert No. 203 -- Job Safety Analysis (JSA)http://www.gomr.boemre.gov/homepg/offshore/safety/safealt/SA_203...
U.S. Department of the Interior
Minerals Management Service
Gulf of Mexico OCS Region
Safety Alert No. 203Contact: David Dykes
August 22, 2002(504) 731-3249
Job Safety Analysis (JSA)
Recent investigations of fatal accidents in the Outer Continental Shelf (OCS) have revealed
that the fatalities occurred during the performance of day-to-day tasks. MMS found that, in
each of the accidents, a lack of written, procedural guidelines for the performance of these
routine tasks was identified as a cause of the accidents. Further, as a result of the latest
annual performance reviews, MMS has found that there is a lack of a clear understanding
by many operators of what constitutes a Job Safety Analysis (JSA), and most operators do
not have a formal review process for determining which jobs require a JSA. It appears that
most operators conduct a JSA on routine tasks where most accidents are occurring.
However, operators are not considering routine tasks that have the potential for severe
consequences even though no accidents have occurred as yet.
JSA’s can be regarded as one form of hazard analysis. Hazard analysis is an analysis
performed to identify and evaluate hazards for the purpose of their elimination or control.
Job Hazards Analysis (JHA) is used to review the scope of work to be performed on a broad
scale and can uncover hazards overlooked in the original design, mock-up, or setup of a
particular process, operation, or task. A JSA, on the other hand, is a process used to review
site-specific detailed job steps and uncover hazards associated with the specific job
undertaken.
When the hazards have been identified and their severity evaluated, a strategy must then
be developed to eliminate or reduce these hazards. This strategy may include the
development of operating procedures, safe work practices, operating guidelines, or a
combination of all three. These procedures, practices, and/or guidelines must be made
available to the employee performing the tasks. This process of mitigating hazards is
commonly used in industry for situations in which the inherent risks are recognizably high.
Unfortunately, this process is not used as frequently in the more day-to-day tasks. It is
therefore recommended that;
Operators develop a systemic approach for evaluating all tasks to identify those tasks
that have potential severe or fatal consequences should an accident occur;
Once those tasks have been identified, operators should conduct the necessary JHA
and/or JSA to identify those hazards that could lead to potentially severe or fatal
consequences; and
The operator should then eliminate the hazard or reduce the severity of the
consequences through the use of design engineering, administrative controls, or
written procedures and/or guidelines.
1 of 22/21/2012 4:35 PM

—MMS—GOMR—
www.gomr.mms.gov
Visit our Safety Information Website
Safety Alert No. 203 -- Job Safety Analysis (JSA)http://www.gomr.boemre.gov/homepg/offshore/safety/safealt/SA_203...
2 of 22/21/2012 4:35 PM