

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
MMS 
U.S. Department of the Interior 
Minerals Management Service 
 Gulf of Mexico OCS Region
 Safety 
Alert 
Safety Alert No. 280 Contact:  Manny Gagliano 
May 13, 2009 (504) 736 2549 
Worker Fatally Struck by Moving Pipe During Pipelay Operations 
A bevel machine operator was fatally injured on a pipelay barge when he was struck by moving 
pipe during pipelay operations.  An MMS investigation revealed that the conveyor system had 
become inadvertently energized and advanced pipe toward the ready rack where the bevel 
machine operator was working.  The moving pipe on the conveyor system struck the bevel 
machine operator in the back and pinned him between it and the end of a stationary pipe joint on 
the ready rack. 
The MMS investigation identified the following causes of the accident: 
1)   Inadequate hazard analyses and failure to adequately implement hazards analyses 
recommendations.  The recommended physical barriers such as guards or handrails in the 
pinch point area were not installed prior to the accident.   In addition, although close-circuit 
television cameras were installed as recommended, they were not working on the day of the 
accident.  
2)   Failure to adequately implement and adhere to recommendations of the job safety analysis 
(JSA).    The JSA recommended that personnel avoid working in pinch points areas and 
specifically to stand to the side of the pipe while grinding.  The JSA also indicated that 
personnel should not walk in pinch point areas, although the victim’s hand tools were stored 
such that he was required to pass through the pinch point to retrieve them from storage. 
Other contributing causes to the accident included: 
1.	 The inadequacy of the JSA’s.  Job tasks were often vague rather than specific.  The JSA also 
did not include important steps in the task sequence, and did not address the  tasks of specific 
job functions individually or the methods they would use to communicate and coordinate 
their tasks. 
2.	 Inadequate supervision.  The investigation found that it was routine for personnel to walk in 
and work in pinch point areas near the conveyor system.  MMS could find no evidence that 
supervisors, who routinely monitored the area, requested or required the crew to cease this 
practice. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
              
 
3.	 Lack of a detailed written job description and formal training for bevel machine operators. 
The tasks specific to moving and hand grinding pipe were not included in the bevel machine 
operators’ job description.  There was also no specific training for the bevel machine 
operators’ other than on-the-job-training. 
4.	 Failure of the bevel machine operator  to attend safety meetings. There was no evidence that 
the bevel machine operator attended any of the safety meetings. 
5.	 Possible inadequate inspection/maintenance of the conveyor system control panel switches.  
There was no conclusive evidence that proves the condition of a conveyor switch was a 
contributing factor to the accident.  Third party analysis of the control panel switches after 
the accident found that a conveyor switch was prone to sticking and had damaged internal 
components.  This indicated possible lack of inspection and maintenance of the switch. 
Based on the investigation findings, MMS makes the following recommends to Lessees, 
Operators, and their contractors during pipelay operations: 
•	 Safety barriers should be installed and maintained on pipe lay vessel conveyor systems to 
limit access to pinch point areas.   
•	 Warning signs should be posted to alert personnel of pinch point areas. 
•	 Supervisory observations should be conducted more frequently in order to monitor work 
habits of all personnel in all areas, particularly around pipe conveyor systems. 
•	 Lessees should review the company’s safety meeting policies with contract personnel and 
express the importance of conducting safety meetings.  The Lessees should also 
emphasize that documentation of all meetings and those personnel in attendance is 
required. 
•	 Contractors should consider installing CCTV cameras in conveyor system areas to allow 
for additional supervision of operations. 
•	 Contractors should provide detailed written job descriptions and implement formal 
training for specific job duties and responsibilities rather than generalized job 
descriptions that cover several positions.  
•	 Inspection and maintenance guidelines should be provided for all safety equipment in 
place, and this equipment should be inspected for proper operation prior to the 
commencement of a project.  Any inoperable equipment should be repaired, replaced, 
and tested immediately.  Proper documentation of safety equipment inspection, 
maintenance, repairs, and test results should be maintained. 
--MMS--GOMR--
www.gomr.mms.gov 