

Contact: bseepublicaffairs@bsee.gov 
Phone: (800) 200-4853 
Arc Flash Injury During Generator Hookup 
In Dec. 2021, an operator was using the natural gas-powered generator for main power 
and a rental generator for backup power, as the regular diesel backup generator was 
down for repairs. Once repairs to the diesel backup generator were completed, plans 
were made to disconnect from the rental generator and connect to the diesel backup 
generator. The Person in Charge (PIC) and electrician walked down the job, verified the 
breaker’s proper open position, and conducted Lock-Out/Tag-Out (LO/TO) on the rental 
Safety Alert No. 436 
April 1, 2022 
SAFETY ALERT 

generator. The PIC and electrician verified that the engine control switch on the diesel 
backup was in the proper position and verified the diesel backup breaker was also in the 
proper open position. The electrician checked all sides and contact surfaces on the bus 
to verify voltage to ensure that the job was safe to commence. 
The electrician disconnected the rental generator cables and installed the first cable of 
the diesel backup generator. He then connected the next cable of the diesel backup to 
the bus. When the cable touched the attachment lug, an arc flash event occurred, which 
caused the main natural gas generator to shut down. Arc flash is a phenomenon where a 
flashover of electric current leaves its intended path and travels through the air from one 
conductor to another or to ground. As a result of the arc flash, the electrician received a 
second-degree burn to his arm. The job was stopped, and the electrician received 
treatment for his injury. 
The investigation of the incident revealed that: 
· The electrician completed a Job Safety Analysis (JSA) for Daily Electrical Repairs 
but did not detail the work steps and hazards associated with disconnecting and 
reconnecting generator leads to a live bus. 
· The potential hazard of an arc flash was not addressed; therefore, proper 
Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) to protect personnel from arc flash was not 
donned. 
· The electrical cabinets where the cables connect did not have any markings to 
indicate an arc flash possibility. 
· The LO/TO documents failed to indicate specific equipment that was being 
locked out. 
The breaker for the diesel generator was a central safety element. This breaker is 
essential to allowing work to happen on a live bus. A third party analyzed the breaker as 
part of the investigation and their initial finding showed the following: 
· Main trip unit failed primary injection test 
· Damaged arc chutes 
· High resistance in current path 
· Damaged wiring 
· Loose and missing hardware 
· Breaker had a crack in pole base that could allow voltage to leak to ground. 
The breaker could not be isolated as the primary cause of the arc flash event, but it was 
a contributing cause to this incident. 
Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators and contractors consider the following: 
· Conducting proper JSA review and hazard assessment prior to commencing jobs 
that involve voltages greater than 50V. An independent hazard review with 
engineering should be considered for electrical work that is conducted infrequently. 
· Including arc flash as a safety topic and encouraging personnel participation by 
asking questions linked to identifying these hazards. 

· Conducting an arc flash assessment at least annually to ensure that proper 
hazards are understood by all personnel that may work on or near an arc flash 
hazard. The arc flash assessment should review hazard potential, signage, and 
PPE requirements. The assessment should also trigger specific steps to include in 
all supporting documents including LO/TO and JSA. 
· Reviewing OSHA CFR 29 §1910.269 App E - Protection From Flames and Electric 
Arcs., and NFPA 70E – Standard for Electrical Safety in the Workplace, and 
making appropriate adjustments. 
· Reviewing and verifying qualifications of all personnel working on equipment with 
exposed voltage to ensure competency in arc flash prevention and protection. 
· Reviewing all breakers’ age and condition, especially before work that involves 
disconnecting and reconnecting leads of higher voltage equipment. The breakers 
are often run-to-failure elements, but the failure has dire consequences. 
A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of 
the circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains 
recommendations that could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer 
Continental Shelf. 
Category: Arc Flash 