

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
MMS 
U.S. Department of the Interior 
Minerals Management Service 
 Gulf of Mexico OCS Region
 Safety 
Alert 
Safety Alert No. 256 Contact:  Randall Josey 
2 January 2008 (504) 736 2409 
Carbon Monoxide Poisoning 
Operations personnel of an offshore platform were sent to the hospital after they all woke up 
complaining of headaches, nausea and vomiting.  The results of the examination revealed that there 
were elevated levels of carbon monoxide in their blood.  Of the 14 personnel that were examined, 
eight had to be kept overnight for observation.  The eight were released the next day and all returned 
to work with no restrictions. 
Temporary quarters were installed to accommodate personnel during a simultaneous operation of 
producing wells and a well plug and abandonment.  The configuration of the facility’s temporary living 
quarters and accommodation spaces consisted of the platform offices, galley, TV room, bedrooms, 
and bathrooms being stacked on top of the MCC room and generator spaces.  It was concluded from 
the investigation of two independent reports from two industrial air quality engineers that the undiluted 
carbon monoxide fumes from the natural gas engines traveled into the living quarters by the natural 
flow of air around the living quarters’ building.  The fumes were able to gain access into the living 
quarters by way of a fresh air inlet to the air conditioning system, the galley stove exhaust vent, and 
other normal open vents and doorways that exist in all offshore living quarters.  Of these noted 
introduction paths into the quarters, the biggest was the air conditioning system’s fresh air inlet.  Once 
inside the air conditioning system’s vent passage, the operation of the fan motor circulated the fumes 
throughout the quarters, and because the fresh air vent was not ever closed off, this further allowed a 
constant supply of fresh carbon monoxide fumes to be readily available.  
MMS recommends the following: 
•	 Installation of temporary quarters on platforms that have permanently installed natural gas 
engines should be reviewed in respect to the engine’s exhaust. 
•	 Carbon monoxide detectors should be placed inside the quarters and all accommodation 
spaces. 
•	 All existing platforms should be inspected to ensure exhausts are not located near potential 
entry points on temporary or permanently installed living quarters. 
•	 Inspect all exhaust vents to ensure wind flaps are installed and working properly.  
--MMS--GOMR-- 
www.gomr.mms.gov 