U.S. Department of the Interior
Minerals Management Service
Gulf of Mexico OCS Region
Notice No. 176
July 22, 1998
CONTACT: Chuck Schoennagel, Jr.
(504) 736-2923
Mud Logging Unit Explosion and Fire
Recently, an explosion and fire occurred in a mud logging unit during the final phase of rigging it up. Gas
analyzers had been calibrated and the flame ionization detection (FID) and total hydrocarbon analyzer (THA)
modules were left in operation so that they could stabilize. The mud logging personnel were hooking up the
outside sample points and drains when the explosion and fire occurred.
The mud logging unit used FID instrumentation that required hydrogen gas to be piped into the unit to serve as
the fuel for the flame within the instrumentation. It must be noted that the piping and hose connections used to
pipe the hydrogen gas to the unit were neither pressure tested nor checked for leaks; the unit had no gas
detection equipment installed to detect either hydrogen or test/sample gas, nor did the hydrogen bottle have any
shutdown equipment installed to prevent flow should a leak occur. In addition, the inside connection was piped to
the detection modules with polyurethane hose, which was either blown loose or burned off the connector in the
initial explosion and fire. This development allowed the hydrogen to continue to flow and feed the fire in the mud
logging unit.
Therefore, from this information, we recommend the following:
1. Lessees, operators, and contractors shall consider equipping compressed hydrogen and other
flammable gas bottles or generators that supply gas to mud logging units with automatic shut-off
systems.
2. Lessees, operators, and contractors shall consider equipping mud logging units that use FID
instruments with a gas detection system that provides an audible alarm and shuts in the gas supply
when the ambient air reaches the lower explosive limit.
3. Lessees, operators, and contractors shall consider equipping FID instrument systems with
automatic shut-off systems to shut down both the gas supply and the instrument itself should a
flame failure occur.
4. Lessees, operators, and contractors shall consider equipping mud logging units with a positive
purge system that sounds an audible alarm and shuts down the unit when the purge pressure falls
below a minimum level.
5. Lessees, operators, and contractors shall review the piping supplying combustible gases to mud
logging units to ensure that the piping is constructed of appropriate material.
6. Lessees, operators, and contractors shall check the piping supplying combustible gases to mud
logging units to ensure that there are no leaks after installation of the piping.
—GOMR—MMS—
Mu
d Logging Unit Explosion and Firehttp://www.gomr.boemre.gov/homepg/offshore/safety/safealt/sa_176...
1 of 22/21/2012 4:14 PM

Mud Logging Unit Explosion and Fire http://www.gomr.boemre.gov/homepg/offshore/safety/safealt/sa_176... 
MMS Internet Homepage: http://www.gomr.mms.gov 
2 of 2 2/21/2012 4:14 PM