

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
MMS 
U.S. Department of the Interior 
Minerals Management Service 
 Gulf of Mexico OCS Region
 Safety 
Alert 
Safety Alert No. 283 Contact:  Glynn T. Breaux 
7 December 2009 (504) 736-2560 
Crane Shock-Loading resulting from Casing Jack’s  
Hydraulic Hose Fitting Failure  
During a well Plug and Abandonment (P&A) operation a 3/8-inch Casing Jack’s 
Hydraulic Hose (CJHH) fitting, connecting the CJHH to the main hydraulic box for jack 
operation, was damaged while setting the jack’s lower 30-inch slips.  The slips, in 
making contact with the fitting, damaged the fitting and the hydraulic pressure contained 
within the hose was released.  This allowed the 271 feet (previously cut) of 30-inch x 16-
inch x 10-3/4-inch x 7-5/8-inch grouted casing to drop several feet.  The platform crane’s 
5/8-inch auxiliary line that was fastened to the grouted casing could not be lowered in 
time to prevent shock loading to the crane.  The load limit on the crane at its 20 degree 
angle with 55 feet of radius was approximately 4,000 pounds, with an auxiliary line 
breaking force of 33,600 pounds.  Since the auxiliary line could not be lowered in time, 
the auxiliary line broke at the wedge socket dropping the headache ball to the deck with 
shock loading also being applied to the crane.   
Subsequent to the incident a protection plate was constructed to protect the CJHH 
assembly and main hydraulic box from accidental contact.  There were no injuries, 
pollution or other structural damage to the crane resulting from this incident.  
A Minerals Management Service (MMS) investigation into this incident revealed that: 
Inadequate 3/8-inch CJHH/fitting protection resulted in failure of the casing jack. 
The weight of the 271 feet of casing was greater than what the 5/8-inch cable  
could hold.  
The Contractor’s Job Safety Analysis (JSA) provided no detailed guidelines and 
recommendations on the appropriate time to connect the crane and casing string 
to prevent crane shock-loading (i.e., the crane should have been connected after 
the casing was cut into smaller sections).  
The Contractor’s JSA failed to identify the potential 3/8-inch CJHH/fitting crush 
point hazard. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Therefore, the MMS recommends the following: 
The Operator and its contractor should consider the installation of a CJHH 
protection plate / guard to prevent the jack’s slip assembly from striking the 
CJHH / fittings to prevent loss of the casing jack’s hydraulic pressure.  
	 The Operator and/or Contractor’s well procedure and JSA should provide detailed 
guidelines and recommendations on the appropriate time to connect the crane and 
casing string to prevent this potential hazard. 
--MMS--GOMR--
www.gomr.mms.gov 