

 
SAFETY ALERT 
Contact: bseepublicaffairs@bsee.gov 
Phone: (800) 200-4853 
  
 
 
 
 Heat Advisory – Heat-Related Illnesses Occurring Offshore 
 
Figure 1. www.cdc.gov 
Safety Alert No. 467 
Aug. 22, 2023 

 
 
There have been multiple recent instances of personnel experiencing symptoms of 
heat-related illnesses while working offshore. Some examples include: 
    An operator noticed a contractor working on a platform experiencing dehydration 
symptoms. The affected individual was given fluids and told to rest. Out of 
caution, he was later transported to shore for further evaluation.  
 
    An onsite medic observed signs of severe heat exhaustion in an employee. The 
employee was treated with IV fluids on board. After consulting with the onshore 
doctors, the employee was transported in a medevac helicopter to a local 
emergency room for further medical attention. 
 
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) defines heat exhaustion as “the 
body’s response to an excessive loss of water and salt, usually through excessive 
sweating.” They caution heat exhaustion is most likely to affect people with high blood 
pressure and those working in a hot environment. 
Typical symptoms of heat exhaustion include: 
    • Headache                                       • Irritability 
    • Nausea                                           • Thirst 
    • Dizziness                                        • Heavy sweating 
    • Muscle cramps                               • Elevated body temperature 
    • Weakness 
 
According to the CDC, heat stroke “occurs when the body can no longer control its 
temperature: the body’s temperature rises rapidly, the sweating mechanism fails, and 
the body is unable to cool down.” The CDC lists the typical symptoms of heat stroke as 
follows:  
•  Confusion, altered mental status • Seizures 
•  Slurred speech                                    • Very high body temperature 
•  Loss of consciousness  • Hot, dry skin or profuse sweating                               
 
Heat stroke can be fatal if treatment is delayed.   
  
BSEE recommends that operators and contractors, where appropriate, consider 
the following: 
    Advising employees and contractors on the prevention and treatment of heat 
exhaustion and heat stroke. 
 
o Preventing heat exhaustion and heat stroke includes: 
    Drinking plenty of water or a sports drink. 
    Taking breaks in areas with air conditioning or shade to cool off.  

 
 
o Heat exhaustion treatment includes: 
    Providing medical attention to the person showing symptoms. 
    Staying with the employee until medical attention arrives. 
    Removing the employee from the hot area, giving them cool liquids 
to drink, and encouraging the employee to drink. 
    Removing unnecessary clothing, such as shoes, socks, and 
jackets. 
    Cooling the worker with cold compresses, or having the employee 
wash their head, face, and neck with cold water.  
 
o Heat stroke treatment includes:  
    Providing medical attention to the person showing symptoms. 
    Staying with the employee until medical attention arrives. 
    Moving the worker to a cool, shaded area, and removing 
unnecessary clothing.  
    Cooling the worker via: 
    Cold water or ice bath (if possible). 
    Wetting the skin. 
    Placing cold wet clothes on the skin. 
    Soaking clothing with cool water. 
    Circulating air around the employee. 
 
    Considering implementing work policies requiring periodic breaks when working 
outside in high temperatures. According to the CDC’s National Institute for 
Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH), when the heat index is 100°F, a 15-
minute break should be taken for each 45 minutes of moderate intensity work. 
For additional information refer to CDC’s Work/Rest Schedules fact sheet.  
 
    Exercising Stop Work Authority when necessary. 
 
    While conducting a job safety analysis, identifying existing or potential safety, 
health, and environmental hazards associated with each step and considering 
using the OSHA-NIOSH Heat Safety Tool application. 
 
 
Please note: This information was obtained from the CDC and is only as current as the 
date issued. Please refer to the CDC website at Heat Stress Related Illness | NIOSH | 
CDC for the latest information. This information does not substitute professional medical 
advice or consultations with healthcare professionals.  
 
– BSEE – 
 
 
A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations that 
could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
Category: Personnel Safety 