

U.S. Department of the Interior
Minerals Management Service
Gulf of Mexico OCS Region
Safety Alert No. 226
January 28, 2005
Contact: Jack Williams
(504) 731-3012
Pressure Rise to Surface after Cementing Leads to Burst Casing and Loss of Control
Recently, intermediate casing was set and cemented across productive zones in an offshore well. After the
cementing, pressure was observed to be rising on the surface casing annulus, reachingabout
1,200 psi. After a period of time, the pressure appeared to break and decline slowlyuntil no annulus pressure
was indicated on the driller’s console gauges. A supervisor then noted that an independent gauge on the choke
was indicating 3,000 psi on the annulus. This reading was immediately followed by anexplosion as the surface
casing split below the wellhead, allowing the well to flow uncontrolled.
The burst casing and loss of control were caused by pressure migration from a shallowreservoir that had been
pressure-charged during previous operations. This sand was logged, but its productivenature was overlooked
during analysis and it was left uncovered by the cementing operation. The casing wasfound to have been
extensively worn during operations, allowing failure at pressures significantly belowrated burst. This wear was
probably accelerated because of a rig misalignment discovered after the incident. Despite significant metal
recovery from the ditch magnet, the casing was not tested for over 30 days. The driller’s gauges returned a
false pressure reading, probably because of a leak in the hydraulic system that allowed the pressure to appear
to decline when it was actually rising.
A full investigation of this incident was conducted and the report is available on the MMS website:
http://www.gomr.mms.gov/homepg/offshore/safety/acc_repo/accindex.html
The MMS recommends to Operators the following actions:
Close examination of all logs, especially prior to cementing, is recommended to ensure no unexpected
shallow zones are productive. Adjustment of the cementing program is recommended if such zones are
identified.
Careful attention to rig alignment, monitoring of ditch magnet recoveries, and frequent examination of the
drilling wear bushing are recommended to identify potentially worn casing. These steps are particularly
important when extended drilling operations occur within a string of casing.
It is recommended that the main hydraulic gauges of a rig be routinely checked to ensure the lines are
full, and that no hydraulic leaks are present.
  —MMS—GOMR—
www.gomr.mms.gov
Visit our Safety Information Website
Pressure Rise to Surface after Cementing Leads to Burst Casing and L...http://www.gomr.boemre.gov/homepg/offshore/safety/safealt/SA_226...
1 of 12/21/2012 4:43 PM