

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MMS 
U.S. Department of the Interior 
Minerals Management Service 
 Gulf of Mexico OCS Region
 Safety 
Alert 
Safety Alert No. 267 	Contact:  David Dykes 
23 September 2008 	(504) 736 3249 
Post-Hurricane Recovery, Repair and Construction Efforts 
Following the passage of Hurricane Ike, MMS recognizes that there will be an increase in the 
offshore activity regarding recovery and repair efforts.  In consideration of (1) the anticipated 
increase in the amount of construction work in these repair efforts, (2) the possibility of a widely 
varied range of offshore experience on the part of the contracted workers, and (3) the potentially 
unfamiliar hazardous offshore environment in which they are and will be working, MMS 
recommends that special attention be directed by operators to this accelerated construction activity. 
Some specific recommendations to operators are as follows: 
•	 Operators should increase their awareness of their contractor’s general safety plan and monitor 
all aspects of the contractor’s performance for compliance with that plan and that of the 
operator’s plan.. 
•	 Operators should familiarize contractors with their facility’s emergency procedures including, 
but not limited to, alarm recognition, location, and activation; fire fighting and lifesaving 
equipment location and use; and facility evacuation procedures, including muster locations. 
•	 Because of the already existing hazardous conditions for which the construction work is 
required and because of the nature of the construction work itself, operators should require and 
monitor the contractor’s (1) use of personnel protective equipment, e.g., fall arrest and personal 
flotation equipment; (2) adherence to hot work permits; (3) use of barricades to isolate work 
areas and fall hazards; and (4) use of job safety analyses (JSA). 
•	 Because of the potential unfamiliarity of the construction workers with offshore production, 
drilling, and workover operations that might be performed simultaneously with construction 
work, operators should alert construction crews through their supervisors as to the specific oil 
and gas operation with which the construction work might unintentionally interact and the 
possible dire consequences of such interaction.  Operator, construction contractor, and/or joint 
JSA’s should address such possible interactions. 
•	 In order to ensure that all of the above is properly addressed, operators should establish clear 
lines of communication between operator and construction crew supervision and maintain that 
communication throughout the life of the construction project, with special attention being given 
to the possibility of miscommunication caused by crew and shift changes. 
--MMS--GOMR— 
www.gomr.mms.gov 