

1
SAFETY ALERT 
Safety Alert No. 384                                                           Contact: David Nedorostek 
May 13, 2020                                                                              Phone: (703) 787-1029 
Preventing Static Discharge 
In recent years, offshore operators on the Outer Continental Shelf have reported 
multiple flash-fire incidents that resulted in injuries and damage to facilities. 
Investigations found that static discharge was a contributing factor in each of the 
incidents. Flash-fire incidents occurred during multiple types of operations, including 
maintenance on a control panel when natural gas was being vented, or when flammable 
fluids were drained into a bucket or as flammable liquids were transferred between 
containers. 
A static discharge can occur when an electrical charge accumulates on the surfaces of 
two materials, one with a positive charge and the other with a negative charge, that 
make contact and are separated. A static discharge can occur between two solids, a 
solid and a liquid, or between two non-mixable liquids. The heat generated from a static 
discharge is somewhere between 3,000
o
F and 6,000
o
F and can create enough energy 
to start a fire regardless of the flashpoint of hydrocarbon-based fluids. 
Safely discharging the accumulation of static electricity requires bonding and grounding 
of any conductive equipment with the potential to produce electricity. 
· Bonding involves connecting all components in a system using a conductive 
material, usually stranded copper wire or a conductive strap, with a minimum 
diameter of American Wire Gauge No. 6. This helps to keep the bonded objects 
at the same level of potential energy, which can reduce or eliminate the risk of 
static electricity or sparks. 
· Grounding involves connecting the bonded system to earth. The conductive 
path to earth discharges the built-up static electricity to safely ground. 
  
  
Bonding and grounding a metal 
container and drums. 
Anti-static wires for use in 
bonding and grounding. 
A metal container is incorrectly bonded to 
a plastic bucket. 

2
Preparedness and extreme caution must be used wherever static discharge, static 
electricity or sparks may occur on an offshore facility. Examples include: 
· Temporary tanks that contain or have previously contained flammable or 
combustible fluids 
· Temporary vessels or process skids that have no electrical power associated 
· Skid-mounted equipment with no electrical connection to a facility’s power 
system 
· Engine-driven skid-mounted equipment (not including generators) with no 
electrical connection to a facility’s power system 
· Non-conductive plastic buckets used for transferring flammable or combustible 
liquids 
· Pressure washers and steamers used for tank and vessel cleaning 
· Aircraft refueling operations 
· Conductive equipment and operations including, but not limited to, tank and 
container filling, splash filling, tank cleaning, sampling, gauging, switch loading, 
flow back tanks, pumping units, pits, and boilers 
· Loading or unloading flammable materials, such as crude oil or liquid petroleum 
gas portable hand carried containers, such as sample bottles 
Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators and contractors consider the 
following: 
· Ensure that bonding and grounding is conducted to prevent the potential 
accumulation of electrostatic charge by using any of the following connection 
means:  bolted, alligator clips, beam clamps and spring-type clamps; 
· Clamps should have points or teeth to penetrate through paint and bolted, 
clamped, or spring-type clamps should not be stepped on, kicked or otherwise 
exposed to adverse conditions; 
· Ensure that the mating surface for the grounding connection is cleaned of all 
non-conductive materials (e.g. grease, oil, and paint); 
· Consider training offshore workers in grounding and bonding all equipment to 
understand how and why to bond and ground their equipment to ensure safe 
operation; 
· Avoid bonding to a plastic bucket since there is greater difficulty in dissipating 
charges from a plastic container and a conductive bond wire attached to the 
outside of the container will not remove this charge; 
· Follow the equipment manufacturer’s instructions and operator’s written safe 
work procedures for bonding and grounding and using the equipment; 
· Conduct assessments to identify potential hazards such as lower flammable 
limits (LFLs); 
· Identify all potential sources of LFLs on Safety Data Sheets for the products 
present in the atmosphere; 

3
· Ensure that only metal buckets with metal handles are used for collecting 
hydrocarbons or other flammable/combustible liquids; 
· Confirm that metal buckets have direct metal contact using a bonding cable to 
the nozzle or fill pipe from which a liquid is discharged. The nozzle and fill pipe 
should also be metal, and liquid should be discharged slowly to maintain a low 
velocity and minimize the amount of static electricity generated; 
· Ensure that all metal storage tanks are grounded; and, 
· Recommend that all personnel ground their bodies by touching a grounded metal 
surface, such as a steel walkway, before opening a gauge hatch on a tank. 
--BSEE-- 
A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations 
that could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 