

 
SAFETY ALERT 
Contact: bseepublicaffairs@bsee.gov 
Phone: (800) 200-4853 
  
 
 
 
BSEE Alerts Offshore Workers to Series of Incidents 
Involving Self-Retracting Lanyards for Fall Protection  
The Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement (BSEE) has observed a trend of 
safety incidents related to the improper use of fall protection during rope access work. 
Of the many hazardous tasks conducted offshore, those involving the potential to fall 
from heights can be among the deadliest. Due to the frequency of    safety incidents 
occurring during rope access operations (Figure 1), BSEE is informing workers of 
potential dangers and providing recommendations to help prevent future injuries.  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Recent incidents include the following: 
• During an inspection of an overboard water caisson, a worker fell approximately 
90 feet when the main line of the self-retracting lanyard (SRL) slipped, failing to 
stop the fall. The worker’s leg struck a pipe clamp support during the fall, which 
resulted in a laceration to the shin. The investigation determined that the self-
braking belay used at the anchor point for the primary line was incorrectly 
rigged.   
• A worker fell while preparing a transporter for blowout preventer operations. A 
combination of circumstances contributed to the worker’s injuries. Among the 
factors cited were slippery surfaces, exhaustion, and increased distance to an 
Safety Alert No. 492 
Nov. 15, 2024 

 
 
anchor point, which caused the worker to swing from an unsafe angle rather 
than drop vertically (Figure 2). When the worker lost footing and grip, the 
resulting swing caused a much more severe outcome since the worker was 
positioned far from the center point where the SRL was anchored.   
BSEE recommends that operators and their contractors, where appropriate, 
consider the following: 
• Know the lanyard or SRL system’s limitations and always work at angles less 
than recommended. It is considered extremely dangerous to  use a lanyard or 
SRL at more than 15 degrees from vertical; however, some systems will allow 
up to 22.5 degrees from vertical. Check the manufacturer’s recommended 
safe practices.  
• Ensure workers requiring fall protection make it a priority to check the 
condition and know the correct usage of their fall arrest systems. Additionally, 
it is crucial for workers to be physically and mentally prepared to engage in 
these procedures. 
• Perform a thorough inspection of all components of an SRL before each use, 
checking the condition and verifying there are no cracks, rips, or 
malfunctioning parts.  
• Make sure to    use and implement appropriate fall protection.    
• Create and adhere to a strict job safety analysis and follow the requirements 
for self-retracting lifelines.  
• Certify that training has been completed and is current for any employee who 
might be exposed to fall hazards. 
• Perform multiple checks to ensure SRL’s   are functioning and properly rigged. 
• Have a site-specific rescue plan in place.  
• Be aware of the working conditions and environment. Exercise caution in wet 
or slippery conditions, use additional personal protective equipment and other 
safety systems when necessary, and always ensure the structural integrity of 
anchor points. 
 
– BSEE – 
 
 
A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations that 
could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
 
 
Category: Fall Protection Equipment, Personnel Safety 