

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
  
  
 
  
   
 
 
 
  
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
      
MMS 
U.S. Department of the Interior 
Minerals Management Service 
 Gulf of Mexico OCS Region
 Safety 
Alert 
Safety Alert No. 273 	Contact:  Glynn T. Breaux 
23 October 2008 	(504) 736 2560 
Drilling Rig Generator Electrical Equipment Fire 
Recently,  an  electrical  arc  occurred  between  three  main  bus  bars  and  ground  on  a  600  volt  alternating  
current,  3-phase  main  generator’s  Silicon  Control  Rectifier  (SCR)  Panel  during  jack-up  drilling  rig  
operations.  The  electrical  arcing  resulted  in  a  fire  and  $200,000  of  damage  to  the  SCR  equipment  and  
surrounding area, with no report of personnel injury or environmental pollution. 
A  Minerals  Management  Service  (MMS)  investigation  into  this  incident  revealed  that  the  root  cause  of  
the  electrical  arcing  was  the  lack  of  a  proper  Rig  Contractor’s  inspection  and  maintenance  program  as  
follows: 
•	 Soot and/or other contaminates were allowed to build up on the Rig’s SCR Panel’s main bus bars, 
thus allowing a conductive path for the electrical arcing and shorting to occur. 
•	 According  to  the  Rig  Contractor  personnel,  an  annual  maintenance  program  that  included  
cleaning of the main bus bars could have prevented the incident. 
Therefore, the MMS recommends the following: 
•	 Rig  SCR  Panels  should  be  inspected  on  a  regular  basis  and  a  maintenance  program  developed  
based on the results of the inspections. The maintenance program would ensure that internal parts 
of electrical equipment, including bus bars, wiring terminals, insulators, and other surfaces, may 
not be damaged or contaminated by foreign materials such as paint, plaster, cleaners, abrasives, or 
corrosive  residues.  Such  a  program  may  assist  in  eliminating  any  conductive  path  for  the  
electrical arcing and shorting to occur between the SCR Panel bus bars as a result of soot and/or 
other contaminate build up. 
--MMS--GOMR--
www.gomr.mms.gov 