

 
Safety Alert No. 377                          Contact: Jason Mathews  
February 20, 2020                   Phone: (504) 731-1496 
 
Improperly Bypassed Safety Device Poses Work and Environmental 
Hazards 
 
 
 
 
 
On December 30, 2019, BSEE Inspectors working offshore discovered that a level safety high had 
been improperly deactivated  with  a  zip  tie,  resulting  in  the  issuance  of  a  P-103 incident  of  
noncompliance  (INC). There  have  been  multiple  instances  across  the  Gulf  of  Mexico  in  which  
operators  have  failed  to  bypass  or  block  out-of-service devices  in  accordance  with the  Code  of  
Federal Regulations (CFR), specifically 30 CFR 250.869(a).  
 
Per 30 CFR 250.841, all platforms must have a surface safety system in accordance with American 
Petroleum  Institute  (API)   Recommend  Practice  (RP)  14C.  The  safety  analysis  outline  in  the  RP  
states that the safety system should provide two levels of protection. It further explains that when 
bypassing a safety device improperly, the safety system is compromised and presents hazards to 
personnel and the environment. 
 
In  the  past  three  years,  over  40 P-103  INCs  have  been  issued. Reflective  of  the  severity  of  the 
safety hazard related to this incident, an operator who receives a P-103 violation can face a civil 
penalty fine of up to $44,675 per day. In addition, BSEE has the option to escalate willful violations 
into criminal investigations at the individual or company level. 
 
Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators and contractors consider the following: 
 
• Review  and  fully  understand  conditions  for  bypassing  safety  devices  as  prescribed  in  
30 
CFR 250.869(a) and ensure personnel follow proper procedures; 
SAFETY ALERT 
 
 
A level safety high deactivated with a zip tie. 

A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations 
that could assist avoiding potential incidents   on the Outer Continental Shelf.  
 
 
• Emphasize with  personnel  that  they  should  not bypass  or  block  devices  unless  (1)  the  
device  is  being  monitored  and  (2)  the  equipment  is  undergoing  start-up,  testing,  or  
maintenance;  
 
• Ensure only the minimum number of safety devices are bypassed;  
 
• Highlight the  importance  of  Stop  Work  Authority  (SWA) and  encourage personnel to feel 
empowered to initiate SWA procedures without fear of reprisal; 
 
• Monitor work orders and ensure that requested repairs or replacements are being made in 
a timely manner to ensure proper function of equipment; 
 
• Confirm that appropriate bypass flags are available and legible; 
 
• Conduct  and  document  bypassed  safety  device  hunts  and/or  audit  the lockout/tagout 
system on an established reoccurring frequency;  
 
• Ensure your SEMS program has established procedures for investigating all incidents with 
the  potential  for  serious  safety  and/or  environmental  consequences  and  that  it properly 
addresses contributing factors of the incident and its escalation or control; and, 
 
• Assess your evaluation programs to determine if employees feel pressured to bypass safety 
devices; 
 
• Encourage personnel to review Safety Alert 357
 and report hazardous or unsafe working 
conditions, which can be made anonymously, to the BSEE Toll-free Safety Hotline at 1-877-
440-0173.  
--BSEE-- 
 