

 
SAFETY ALERT 
Contact: bseepublicaffairs@bsee.gov 
Phone: (800) 200-4853 
  
  
 
 
 
Flash Fire from Oxygen Regulator Leads to Burn Injury 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
During the process of decommissioning a platform, a    derrick barge crew member 
sustained first-  and second-degree burns on his left wrist when he reached out to grab 
an oxygen bottle valve, even though he was wearing rigging gloves and a fire-retardant 
shirt ( Figure 1). This happened because an oxygen bottle regulator ( refer to Figure 2) 
suddenly burst, starting a    flash fire while the crew member was turning   the valve to 
supply oxygen for welding. The crewmember’s wounds were treated with b urn gel.      
 
When dealing with oxygen systems, it is crucial to understand the interconnection of the 
three elements of the fire triangle
1
: the oxidizing agent (oxygen); system components 
(valves, regulators, fittings, cylinders etc.) serving as the fuel source; and the interaction 
among system components to create the potential ignition source. 
 
 
1
 The fire triangle or combustion triangle is a simple model for understanding the necessary ingredients for most fires. 
The triangle illustrates the three elements a fire needs to ignite: heat, fuel, and an oxidizing agent. A fire naturally 
occurs when the elements are present and combined in the right mixture
. 
  
 
Safety Alert No. 475 
Nov. 14, 2023 
Figure 1: Burn injury to wrist of operator. Figure 2: Damage to aluminum fitting on regulator. 

 
 
During the incident, the aluminum regulator attached to the oxygen bottle was directly 
exposed to the high-pressure environment and a flow of oxygen-rich gas, creating a 
susceptible chain for potential ignition. Ignition sources in an oxygen system can 
include:  
1.) Heat: produced at a point of a striking blow. 
2.) Impact:  from high velocity particle flow.  
3.) Friction:  from two solid materials rubbing together. 
4.) Compression –   Expansion Heating:
2
 Rapid pressure changes,  such as the 
quick opening of a valve, can lead to compression-expansion heating of gas, 
potentially causing ignition. 
 
Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators and their contractors, where 
appropriate, consider the following: 
 
• Ensuring proper training and awareness of oxygen system safety among all 
personnel. 
•    Exercising caution to prevent exposure of skin w hen handling oxygen bottles and 
equipment. 
• Regularly inspecting and maintaining oxygen system components to identify and 
address potential issues. 
• Following manufacturer guidelines and industry best practices for the safe 
handling and use of oxygen equipment. 
• Maintaining a safe distance from oxygen systems during operations to reduce the 
risk of exposure to potential ignition sources. 
•    Using oxygen bottle regulators constructed with brass fittings rather than 
aluminum. Aluminum easily ignites in high-pressure oxygen, burns rapidly, and 
has very high heats of combustion. 
• Adhering to the following guidelines to ensure safety during valve operations: 
o Opening v alves slowly: When operating valves, particularly those 
connected to oxygen systems, always open them slowly. Rapid valve 
 
2
Compression– Expansion Heating:  also called “adiabatic heating” refers to an increase in temperature that 
happens when air or gas is compressed (squeezed) and then expands without any heat being added or taken away 
from the surroundings.  It’s the result of changes in pressure and volume without heat exchange with the 
environment.  

 
 
opening can subject passageways to a rapid compression, leading to a 
rise in temperature and the possibility of ignition. 
o Positioning v alves away from the operator: Ensuring that valves are 
positioned away from the operator’s body. This positioning minimizes the 
risk of exposure to any unexpected release of gases or potential ignition 
sources. 
o P
reventing p article introduction: F ast valve opening can introduce 
particles into the flow path of the regulator. These particles, when 
released, could ignite large materials within the system. To mitigate this 
risk, open valves in a controlled manner. 
• Ensuring warning labels are in adequate condition and clearly legible on valve 
regulators as applicable. 
•    Ensuring oxygen refilling stations,  and maintenance areas where oxygen 
equipment is serviced, are clean and free of dirt, oils, and grease to prevent 
valves from collecting any residual contaminants.  
 
• Ensuring proper Personnel Protective Equipment (PPE)
3
 is    always worn during 
the operation or maintenance of an oxygen regulator, including well-fitting shirt 
sleeves that will not ride up upon movement. 
 
 
– BSEE – 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3
 Personal protective equipment, commonly referred to as "PPE", is equipment worn to minimize 
exposure to hazards that cause serious workplace injuries and illnesses. These injuries and illnesses may 
result from contact with chemical, radiological, physical, electrical, mechanical, or other workplace 
hazards. 
A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations that could 
assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
 
 
Category: Fire; Personnel Safety 