

*T-Times can be defined as the projected evergreen duration beginning with the identification of a storm
and ending upon impact. T-Times should be established and constantly monitored throughout the lifecycle 
of a storm to assist in determining when to safely depart / evacuate the area.
Safety Alert No. 415                             Contact: Jason Mathews      
March 8, 2021                               Phone: (504) 731-1496 
Inadequate Preparations in Advance of Inclement Weather 
Results in Excessive Rig Damage and Risk to Personnel 
On Oct. 28, 2020, an active drillship in the Gulf of Mexico (GOM) sustained major damage 
to various operational components while evacuating the rig from an area impacted by 
Hurricane Zeta. Although no personnel casualties were reported, the incident presented a 
potential threat to rig personnel due to delaying the initiation of emergency evacuation 
procedures by remaining on location as a    result of underestimating the severity of the 
storm. 
                           
On Thursday, Oct. 22, 2020, drillship personnel began monitoring weather disturbances, 
lower surface pressures and relatively higher amounts of moisture in the Caribbean, 
indicating potential organized storm development. Tropical storm growth progressed in 
conjunction with T-Times,* reducing over the course of six days as drilling and associated 
storm-prep operations continued. Throughout the six days, the drillship personnel were 
consistently advised by forecasters that “the [rig] location is not expected to see direct, 
significant impacts.” As the tropical storm began developing on Oct. 22, the well 
SAFETY ALERT 
            Figure 1: Riser in contact with the hull after the EDS                            Figure 2: Ruptured Riser Joint 

*Red Watch Circle can be defined as the maximum offset / inclination the riser string and its associated 
components are designed to withstand when latched to a subsea BOP.
experienced a kick/influx of formation fluids during operations. After circulating out the 
kick, the rig pumped a cement squeeze on Oct. 24. As the tropical storm transitioned into 
a hurricane Oct. 27, a packer was installed and tested as an additional barrier to further 
stabilize the well. The riser was displaced with seawater, and the work string, including 
the running tool, was pulled out of the hole in preparation for the hurricane. As Hurricane 
Zeta’s arrival became imminent on Oct. 28, wind gusts were much higher than anticipated 
(roughly 100 miles per hour). Due to the hurricane’s intensity, the rig was pushed off 
location toward the Red Watch Circle,* as the riser approached its maximum allowable 
angle of deviation. Due to the drillship’s increasing proximity to the Red Watch Circle 
boundary, the Emergency Disconnect Sequence (EDS) function was activated, unlatching 
the Lower Marine Riser Package (LMRP) from the blowout preventer, allowing the rig to 
move off location. 
After the EDS was initiated, the riser contacted the hull in the moonpool (figure 1) due to 
the severe swells that formed throughout the storm, causing damage to the riser (figure 
2). Furthermore, the LMRP endured damage to its frame, piping, and coflex after 
contacting the seafloor several times. A comprehensive property damage assessment 
was conducted by the operator and rig owner in the days following Hurricane Zeta. 
Inspectors determined that the tensioner, flex joint, telescopic joint, LMRP, riser joints, 
cabling, and other riser-related components had sustained significant damage. 
Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators and contractors consider the 
following: 
· Collectively review the Emergency Evacuation Plan (EEP), including estimated T-
Times, periodically to ensure all information is accurate, up-to-date, and understood 
and agreed upon by the impacted workers. 
· Consider enhancing procedures in the EEP for safely securing wells in anticipation 
of an approaching storm to include abnormal well conditions, such as ballooning or a 
kick/influx. 
· Review bridging documents and consider the delegation of authority regarding 
emergency response and control to be a joint responsibility between the operator 
and rig owner. Initiation of this element should invoke a collaborative effort between 
both parties. 
· Recognize and differentiate the roles and responsibilities between the Ultimate Work 
Authority (UWA) in the field and onshore management for determining the course of 
action when severe weather is approaching. 
· Maintain constant communication between the shore base and offshore assets 
throughout the duration of adverse weather. 
· Before the start of hurricane season, verify the criteria for initiating an EDS is 

A Safety Alertis a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding an accident or near miss. It also contains recommendations 
that should help prevent the recurrence of such an incident on the Outer Continental 
Shelf.
                                                                                                                                                          Category: Weather 
accurate and consider all factors relevant to deteriorating weather conditions. 
· Define phases and corresponding actions to be taken regarding emergency 
evacuation based on the status of forecast risk models and T-Times, such as 
updating Red Watch Circle parameters. 
· Analyze and confirm design limitations of risers, tensioners, LMRP, and other 
critical well operations equipment. 
· Evaluate the direction of disconnect for potential contacts to the LMRP and 
associated equipment with the seafloor. 
· Notify BSEE when rig movements occur, clearly indicating if emergency action was 
implemented, as well as if any potential damage was encountered. 
· Review this Safety Alert in conjunction with Safety Alert No. 363 – Injury Occurs 
when Non-evacuated Personnel Enter Weather-restricted Area as well as Safety 
Alert No. 401 – BSEE Identifies Improvements to Hurricane Preparedness During 
Risk Based Inspections to reinforce the proper protocols during inclement weather 
conditions. 
--BSEE-- 