

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MMS 
U.S. Department of the Interior 
Minerals Management Service 
 Gulf of Mexico OCS Region
 Safety 
Alert 
Safety Alert No. 286 	Contact:  Glynn T. Breaux 
15 December 2009 	(504) 736-2560 
FIRE INSIDE AC EVAPORATOR ENCLOSURE 

Recently operations personnel discovered a temperature increase inside the climate-controlled 
Motor Control Center (MCC) building.  Upon further investigation, evidence indicated that a fire 
had occurred inside one of the air conditioner (AC) evaporator enclosures located on top of the 
MCC building.  The MCC building is not located in a Classified Area. 
A Minerals Management Service (MMS) investigation into this incident revealed the following 
findings: 
The ¼-inch drain line from the bottom of the fuel gas meter’s 5-way valve manifold was 
tied-in directly into the AC evaporator enclosure’s drain line which terminates at the 
main drain line for the fuel gas skid. 
The fuel gas meter’s 5-way valve manifold was drained regularly to prevent fluid build­
up in the fuel gas meter. 
Operations personnel indicated that, on occasion, they would experience a gas/condensate 
odor in the MCC building but the source of the odor was never investigated. 
Gas migrated through the AC evaporator enclosure’s drain line and accumulated inside 
the AC evaporator enclosure prior to ignition.   
Due to the severity of the damage caused by the fire, the source of ignition could not be 
determined.   
Therefore, the MMS recommends the following: 
Process drain lines (pressure or atmospheric) should not be combined with domestic drain 
lines. 
Tubing and/or piping should be traced prior to being tied-in, and the hazards of drain line 
placement should be evaluated prior to installation.   
All sources of gas/condensate odors should be investigated if the odor is not considered a 
normal part of the particular operation or area. 
The facility should be visually inspected on a regular basis for any indication of an 
abnormal condition; e.g., odors, leaks, etc. 
--MMS--GOMR— 
www.gomr.mms.gov 