

Safety Alert No. 407                                Contact: Jason Mathews      
January 21, 2021                                                Phone: (504) 731-1496 
Risk-Based Inspections of Subsea Leak Detection 
Technology Reveals Gaps in System Processes 
                                                            
Recent leaks from subsea production equipment have demonstrated the need for 
improvements in subsea leak detection (SSLD) technology: 
May 2016 – A crack in a subsea jumper just below the mudline leaked an estimated 
1,926 bbls of oil. The abnormal flow behavior was initially suspected to be slugging. The 
field was shut in over 8 hours after the abnormal flow behavior was observed. 
October 2017 – A fractured subsea wellhead jumper leaked an estimated 16,000 bbls of 
oil. The leak was not confirmed for over 24 hours and was initially suspected to be a 
malfunction of the multiphase flow meter upstream of the leak. 
July 2020 – A damaged pipe elbow on the jumper caused a leak of an estimated 479 
bbls of oil. The leak was not confirmed until an oil sheen was observed at the surface. 
The investigations of the 2016 and 2017 leaks concluded that the SSLD capabilities were 
inadequate, delayed leak detection and increased the volumes of oil discharged. In 
response, BSEE requested information on the leak detection capabilities of all Gulf of 
Mexico operators’ subsea wells and conducted risk-based inspections of five operators 
representing 34% of Gulf of Mexico oil production. 
SAFETY ALERT 
May 2016 - The load limiting joint cracked, but the leak 
was not identified until many hours later. 
October 2017 - The operators noticed that the rates from the 
flow meter upstream of the leak did not match the LACT 
meter but did not initially suspect that a leak was the cause. 

2
The overall finding of the evaluation was that while all operators had implemented SSLD 
technology, there were gaps and areas for improvement in the implementation of the 
personnel procedures and management system processes that are required for these 
systems to be effective. 
Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators and contractors consider the 
following: 
· Assume that any observed abnormal subsea flow behavior may be a leak and 
immediately investigate and identify the cause of the behavior to confirm or rule out 
the existence of a leak; 
· Establish, document and communicate a clear chain of command and response 
procedure for SSLD alarms. At minimum, it should include: 
o Who has the initial responsibility to respond to an SSLD alarm (e.g. control 
room operator [CRO])? 
o If it cannot be quickly determined whether an alarm is valid, when and to 
whom will the response be escalated to (e.g. CRO escalates to Ultimate 
Work Authority/Offshore Installation Manager within one hour of the alarm)? 
The contact information for onshore personnel who can provide technical 
support should also be provided. 
o Who has the authority to override an SSLD alarm/shutdown timer (e.g. 
UWA/OIM) once it is confirmed to be a false alarm? 
o How long before a well automatically shuts in following an SSLD alarm? (e.g. 
four-hour timer before automatic well shut in) 
· When an SSLD alarm/shutdown timer is overridden, operators should document 
the actions taken and why they concluded that the abnormal behavior was not a 
leak. Review these records periodically since frequent false alarms, or no alarms, 
may indicate that an SSLD system’s configuration needs to be adjusted; 
· Design SSLD drills and practice them regularly. Include scenarios for both valid 
and false SSLD alarms; 
· Evaluate records of past failures of subsea leak detection systems (e.g. BSEE 
Panel Reports 2018-001 and 2019-002, which cover the 2016 and 2017 leaks 
mentioned previously) to determine if your system would have detected them and, 
if not, implement corrective actions to improve detection of future leaks; 
· Train (and periodically re-train) personnel in the operation of your subsea leak 
detection system, the diagnosis and confirmation of potential leaks and the 
response to SSLD alarms. Use case studies (e.g. BSEE panel reports) to learn 
from prior events; 
· Periodically test the SSLD system and the operation of the associated 
measurement devices. Check for inhibited or bypassed alarms; 

A Safety Alertis a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations 
that could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf.
Category: Subsea,Production
3
· If possible, configure your control system to permit startup and shut-in of wells 
without manually bypassing SSLD alarms; 
· Integrate the subsea leak detection into the pre-startup review process for new or 
modified wells (e.g. checking for personnel competency, verifying SEMS 
documentation, revising procedures, etc.); 
· Alarm set points may need to be periodically re-evaluated and adjusted as the flow 
conditions of a well change over time. Use management of change when modifying 
a SSLD system’s configuration; 
· Use Remotely Operated Vehicles to conduct surveys of subsea equipment to 
check for excessive movement, subsidence or burial. Surveys can be conducted at 
regular intervals, at intervals determined by a risk-based analysis, and following 
major environmental events (e.g. subsea landslides), and before and after drilling 
campaigns; 
· If your facility hosts third-party wells with third-party personnel on-site, coordinate 
with their management to ensure that personnel meet minimum competency 
requirements for subsea leak detection and response; and, 
· Participate in Offshore Operators Committee and/or other industry workgroups to 
standardize best practices for existing subsea leak detection technologies, as well 
as research and apply new technologies that may improve industry’s capabilities 
with respect to SSLD in the Gulf of Mexico. 
--BSEE-- 