U.S. Department of the Interior
Minerals Management Service
Gulf of Mexico OCS Region
Safety Alert No. 188
May 2, 2000
Contact: Frank Pausina
504-736-2560
Fire with Fatality and Injury
As part of the deactivation of a platform’s process drain line system, a constructionemployee was in the
process of cutting a separator’s drain line with an electric band saw when condensatesprayed from the cut onto
the employee and was ignited by the saw. The employee died days later from the resultant burns. Another
employee was injured in his attempts to assist the fatally burned employee. The source of the condensate was
the platform’s fuel gas scrubber whose drain line’s manual block valve was opened during the referenced
construction operations. The opening of the valve and the decision of the construction employees to use the saw
after previous attempts by the same employees to cut the line resulted in the spraying of condensate from the
cut are considered major causes of the accident. Contributing in part to the accidentwere (1) a lack of
procedural guidelines for the construction work to be performed, (2) misunderstandings and erroneous
assumptions regarding the hot work permit, (3) a lack of adequate communication between designated operator
and contractor personnel and among contractor personnel themselves, and (4) a relative unfamiliarity with the
platform process equipment on the part of a contractor employee.
Therefore, from this information and information contained in the MMS report on the subject accident, the
following are recommended:
Operators review their established procedure for coordinating proposed multiple workassignments
for any facility. Operators should establish such a procedure, as described above, ifone does not
exist.
1.
Operators provide general written procedures for all construction projects, includingan emphasis
on safety issues. The procedures should address all aspects of the job that have beenidentified,
through the results of a job safety analysis, as being potentially hazardous. For example, in the
case of construction work to be performed on process piping, the procedures should address, but
certainly not be limited to, the isolation of all relevant energy sources by, at a minimum, blinding,
disconnecting, or double block and bleeding, and the purging of all involved lines prior to cutting.
2.
Operators review the method by which they monitor their contractors’ adherence to allagreed
upon safety standards and requisite Federal regulations.
3.
For details of the accident, see OCS Report MMS 2000-029. Copies of the report may beobtained from the
MMS Public Information Office located at 1201 Elmwood Park Boulevard, New Orleans, Louisiana 70123
(1-800-200-GULF or local 504-736-2519).
–GOMR–MMS–
Visit our Safety Information Website:
http://www.gomr.mms.gov/homepg/offshore/safety/safety.html
Safety Alert No. 188 - Fire with Fatality and Injuryhttp://www.gomr.boemre.gov/homepg/offshore/safety/safealt/SA_188...
1 of 12/21/2012 4:29 PM