

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
MMS 
U.S. Department of the Interior 
Minerals Management Service 
 Gulf of Mexico OCS Region
 Safety 
Alert 
Safety Alert No. 270 	
15 October 2008 	
Contact:  Glynn T. Breaux 
(504) 736 2560 
Dresser-Rand D-VIP Compressor Cylinder Head 

Replacement for Acorn Nut Part Number TEVM0001
 

 
Recently,  a  Field  Gas  Compressor  (FGC)  suffered  a  fracture  and  ejection  of  the  3
rd
  stage  
compressor  cylinder  head.  The  ejected  head  struck  an  adjacent  gas  turbine  air  inlet  housing  
approximately 35 feet away, with no report of personnel injury or environmental pollution. The 
FGC was immediately secured and locked-out of service.  
A MMS investigation into the incident revealed the following: 
•	 Chloride  corrosion  and  pitting  of  the  acorn  nut  on  the  FGC’s  3
rd
  stage  compressor  
cylinder  head,  believed  to  be  caused  by  salt  water  entrained  in  the  ambient  air  or  in  the  
process gas stream, resulted in failure and ejection of the acorn nut; 
•	 When  corrosion  inside  the  cylinder  head  was  noted  during  a  compressor  overhaul  in  
February  2008,  corrosion  on  the  interior  surface  of  the  acorn  nut  was  machined  and  a  
layer  of  chrome  was  applied  to  the  machined  surface.  The  post-incident  examination  
revealed  that  all  of  the  corrosion  had  not  been  removed  from  acorn  nut  bore  during  the  
repair process. Had the repair procedure been properly executed, the incident may have 
been averted. 
•	 Dresser-Rand issued a Product Safety Warning notifying customers of reported instances 
of  corrosion  leading  to  the  separation  of  the  “acorn  nut”  of  the  Variable  Volume  
Clearance Pocket Assembly. This assembly was utilized in production between 1997 and 
2000.  A  naked  eye  visual  inspection  of  the  acorn  nut  will  not  reveal  to  what  extent  
corrosion has occurred. 
Therefore, the MMS recommends the following: 
•	 All  operators  possessing  Dresser-Rand  D-VIP  compressors  should  consult  with  their  
maintenance  personnel  and  manufacturer’s  representative  to  determine  any  action  to  be  
taken. 
--MMS--GOMR--
www.gomr.mms.gov 