

 
SAFETY ALERT 
Contact: bseepublicaffairs@bsee.gov 
Phone: (800) 200-4853 
  
  
 
 
 
Bypass of Emergency Shutdown in Rented Equipment 
Results in Additional Risk to Personnel and the Environment 
                      
 
Figure 2: ESD for rental generator/light plant found in 
bypass. 
During a BSEE offshore regulatory inspection of a coiled tubing unit (CTU) layout and 
rig up, inspectors discovered a concerning issue with the rental generator/light plant 
powering the CTU. Specifically, they found evidence of tampering with the emergency 
shutdown (ESD) and spark arrestor system. The ESD had been bypassed by removing 
the air intake hose, which had become clogged with black soot, causing it to collapse 
and leading to issues such as sputtering, smoking, and eventually engine failure. T he 
air intake hose was never re-installed, resulting in the continued bypass of the ESD. In 
addition, the inside of the generator/light plant was coated with black soot due to a 
damaged muffler. 
 
In response to these findings, the inspection team requested that the operator 
(personnel on duty) test the ESD to confirm its functionality. The test revealed the ESD 
failed to properly shut down the power-generating unit, as designed. 
 
 
  
 
Safety Alert No. 470 
Oct. 23, 2023 
Figure 1: Rental generator/light plant. 

 
 
It is crucial to note that ESD systems are specifically designed to prevent unsafe 
operations by automatically shutting down equipment and offshore facility systems in 
the event of unsafe conditions. In this case, the ESD for the rental generator/ light was 
configured to shut down both the generator/light plant itself and the CTU.  
 
The ESD system bypass placed personnel at additional risk for various hazards, 
including fire, explosion, inhalation, rotating equipment, moving equipment, pinch points, 
unexpected pressure releases, and dropped objects. Immediate corrective actions 
should be taken to rectify these safety concerns and ensure the proper functioning of 
the ESD system to mitigate risks effectively. 
 
In addition, BSEE recommends that operators and their contractors, where 
appropriate, consider doing the following: 
• Ensuring reviewed and approved Management of Change or Lock Out Tag Out 
procedures are in place, offering protection for the system or piece of equipment 
if the ESD must be placed in bypass for maintenance, testing, or troubleshooting 
purposes. 
• Examining rental equipment arriving onsite for obvious signs of damage, lack of 
maintenance, improper operation, over-heating, or over-pressure. Stopping the 
job until all such issues have been resolved, equipment has been successfully 
function tested, and is fully functional for operations. 
• Reviewing preventative maintenance records and ensuring adequate inspection 
and functional performance of rental equipment before use. 
• Providing instructions, training, competency assessment, and proper supervision 
to operators and maintenance personnel.  
• Ensuring compliance with 30 CFR 250.867 (a), (c), and (d) (Temporary quarters 
and temporary equipment)  and 250.842(a)(2) and (3) ( Approval of safety 
systems design and installation features). 
• Inspecting generators and critical equipment in accordance with BSEE 
regulations, ensuring all meet the minimum safety requirements and the 
recommendations provided by manufacturers. These inspections should be 
documented to maintain a clear record of equipment integrity and performance. 
Each inspection and test should verify: 
1.  Inspections Were Performed at Appropriate Intervals:  Inspecting 
generators and critical equipment at intervals specified by BSEE 

 
 
regulations and manufacturer guidelines to guarantee compliance and 
optimal functionality. 
2.  Proper Documentation is Provided:  Maintaining comprehensive records of 
each inspection and test, including: 
a.  Date of Inspection and Test: Clearly note the date when the 
inspection and testing took place. 
b.  Equipment Identifier: Include the serial number or any unique 
identifier associated with the specific equipment that underwent 
inspection or testing. 
c. Description: Provide a detailed description of the inspection or test 
procedures conducted to ensure clarity and accountability. 
d.  Inspection Results: Document the outcomes and findings of the 
inspection or test, including any issues, concerns, or areas that 
require corrective action. 
• Reviewing Safety Alert 432
 BSEE Identifies Maintenance and Certification Issues 
of Rental Generators. 
 
– BSEE – 
 
 
A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations that 
could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
 
 
Category: Other  