U.S. Department of the Interior
Minerals Management Service
Gulf of Mexico OCS Region
Contact: John McCarroll
(985) 853-5892
Safety Alert No. 215
October 6, 2003
Diving Fatality
During a recent well plugging and abandonment operation, a diver was fatally injured when an explosion
occurred during the cutting of a section of casing with a torch. The MMS investigation of the accident,
conducted in conjunction with the U. S. Coast Guard, revealed, in part, the following:
The operator of the lease gave the diving contractor, who was responsible for the well stub removal, a pre-job
schematic of the well stub configuration that differed from the actual configuration. The well casings were
fitted with a wellhead adaptor which, although it contained two vent holes, allowed gases produced during
burning operations to accumulate in a space above the holes. Further, gas was noted to be coming from the vent
holes immediately prior to and during the removal operation. Although the configuration discrepancy and gas
vent
ing were observed and raised initial concerns on the part of the contractor prior to the removal operation,
subsequent discussion between the operator’s onsite representative and the contractor’s onsite supervisors
resulted in no prescribed procedure to determine if gas could accumulate above the vent holes. It was also
revealed that at least one diving crew employee, while recognizing the possibility, not probability, of gas
accumulation, believed the torch to be distant enough from any gas accumulation to be a potential ignition
source. No Job Safety Analysis (JSA) was conducted for the immediate mechanical aspects of the well removal
with respect to cutting and burning.
MMS concluded that hydrogen gas from the burning operation accumulated above the referenced vent holes and
was ignited during burning operation by a cinder that floated to the gas in an air bubble. MMS further concluded
that multiple causes of the accident ranged from having no JSA for the immediate task of well stub removal to a
failure on the part of operator and contract onsite personnel to react appropriately to onsite conditions other than
those expected.
Therefore, on the basis of its investigative conclusions, MMS recommends that in the matter of diving
operations, especially those involving well head removals, lessees and operators review their policies and
procedures regarding
1.The transfer to contractors of technical information pertinent to the contracted tasks (information
transfer).
2.The onsite responsibilities of lessee and operator representatives with respect to unexpected conditions
and resultant enforced termination or modification of contractor operations (management of change).
3.The required use by contractors of JSA’s for any contracted task involving hazards (job planning and
haz
ard avoidance).
  —MMS—GOMR—
www.gomr.mms.gov
Safety Alert No. 215 - Diving Fatalityhttp://www.gomr.boemre.gov/homepg/offshore/safety/safealt/SA_215...
1 of 22/ 21/2012 4:39 PM

Safety Alert No. 215 - Diving Fatality http://www.gomr.boemre.gov/homepg/offshore/safety/safealt/SA_215... 
Visit our Safety Information Website 
2 of 2 2/21/2012 4:39 PM