

Safety Alert No. 388                           Contact: Jason Mathews 
June 03, 2020                               Phone: (504) 731-1496 
Malfunctioning Storage Batteries Cause Fires and Explosions 
       
Heat and pressure built up inside the battery casing before 
exploding. 
This battery may have exploded because it was charged with a 
second battery that had a malfunction, causing this battery to 
overcharge. 
  
Recently, there have been several incidents related to lead-acid storage batteries, including 
fires and explosions. Examples of these incidents include: 
· When lead-acid storage batteries powering a compressor control panel exploded in a 
battery box. The heat and pressure inside the battery blew off the top of the battery. 
· A starter-booster unit that caused the onboard battery circuitry to electrically short due to 
age-related wear and tear. Heat built up to a combustion temperature and caused a fire. 
· A fire caused by a battery with an internal short that was stored in a very hot area. The 
heat melted plastic on the battery, creating a chemical reaction with the lead inside the 
battery. This fire ultimately shut down the platform. 
Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators and contractors consider the following: 
· Write the purchase date and service start date on all batteries; 
· Avoid mixing old and new batteries; 
· If specific manufacturer guidance on battery shelf life is not available, consider adopting 
policies to replace batteries; 
· Periodically inspect batteries for signs of leakage, swelling or damage; 
· Check battery chargers and connectors for signs of damage or electrical faults; 
SAFETY ALERT 

A Safety Alertis a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding apotential safety issue. It alsocontains recommendations 
thatcould assist avoiding potentialincidentson the Outer Continental Shelf.
· Ventilate battery enclosures and 
buildings to prevent gas accumulation. 
Charging batteries can release small 
amounts of explosive hydrogen gas 
that may not be detectable by gas 
detectors; 
· Ventilate any unventilated enclosures 
thoroughly before performing hot work 
nearby; 
· Avoid storing batteries close together or 
in confined spaces; 
· Store batteries in a cool place and 
protect them from damage when not in 
use; 
· Use proper PPE when cleaning up 
battery leaks; 
· Uninterruptable Power Supplies (UPS) 
may use storage batteries and can 
have similar hazards and maintenance 
requirements. As a result, UPS failures 
have led to several blackouts and 
facility evacuations. Refer to BSEE 
Safety Alert 333 for more information; 
· Ensure the use of the correct battery 
type for its application. Different battery 
types may be very similar in 
appearance and can be inadvertently 
swapped; 
· Dispose of batteries properly and 
separate from other waste. Disposing 
batteries in trash compactors has 
caused fires offshore; 
· Batteries that are designed to be 
charged by solar powered battery 
chargers may not be compatible with 
chargers using generator/mains power; 
and, 
· Ensure that the charger is set to the 
correct type and voltage before use. 
Some chargers can charge multiple 
battery types. 
--BSEE-- 
This battery charger has a switch to select different battery 
types: Lead Acid/AGM or Gel Cell 
A typical battery enclosure is shown above. The service 
start dates have been written on the batteries. 
This battery charger has a switch to select different battery 
types: Lead Acid/AGM or Gel Cell 