

 
 
 
 
 
 
              
MMS 
 
 
 
 
 
U.S. Department of the Interior 
Minerals Management Service 
 Gulf of Mexico OCS Region
 Safety 
Alert 
Safety Alert No. 281 Contact:  Glynn T. Breaux 
23 July 2009 (504) 736-2560 
Drilling Rig Air-Operated Hoist Operation Fatality 
Recently an accident resulted in one fatality and injury on a jack-up rig during use of air-
operated hoist (air tugger) to lift 50 feet of 2-inch rubber hose, approximately 400 pounds, for 
testing the well’s 13-3/8 inch x 9-7/8 inch casing annulus in preparation of sidetracking the well.  
A WECO Figure1502 hammer union had previously been modified to include the addition of a 
welded bale that would be used as the lifting connection (see Figure 1).  When the hose 
assembly was lifted approximately 30 feet into the derrick above the rig floor, the modified 
union failed just above the weld on one end of the bale.  The first Floor Hand (FH-1), standing 
near the center of the rig floor but not directly under the assembly, received life threatening 
injuries (unresponsive but breathing) subsequent to being struck on the top of his hardhat by the 
modified hammer union.  FH-1 was pronounced deceased approximately 2 hours later in the 
hospital’s emergency room.  The second Floor Hand (FH-2), standing next to the hand railing on 
the rig floor and manipulating the hose to protect the load from snagging, was initially knocked 
down by the hose, arose to move away from the railing when he was knocked down a second 
time by the air tugger’s wire rope that back-lashed subsequent to the loss of load weight.  FH-2 
sustained superficial injuries. 
Failed bale 
above weld 
Figure 1: Modified WECO Figure 1502 hammer union with failed welded bale 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
              
 
 
 
A Minerals Management Service (MMS) Panel investigation into this accident revealed that the 
direct cause of the accident was the use and failure of the modified WECO Figure 1502 hammer 
union with welded bale being used as the lifting connection.  This lifting connection was being 
used in spite of the Contractor’s Health, Safety and Environmental (HSE) policy stating that 
homemade or modified lifting equipment shall never be used. 
Therefore, the MMS recommends the following: 
•	 Non-approved/non-certified (homemade/field manufactured) lifting equipment should be 
immediately removed (discarded) and immediately brought to management’s attention. 
•	 In order for lift equipment inspection/maintenance programs to be effective, Operators 
and their Contractors should: 
o	 Include visual inspections prior to use.  
o	 Properly clean, grease and/or oil equipment after each use. 
o	 Ensure that any lifting component is used only in accordance with the 
manufacturer’s specifications and instructions for use.  
o	 Replace the equipment when it exceeds the manufacturer’s recommended use.  
--MMS--GOMR--
www.gomr.mms.gov 