

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
	
	
	 
	 
MMS 
U.S. Department of the Interior 
Minerals Management Service 
 Gulf of Mexico OCS Region
 Safety 
Alert 
Safety Alert No. 261 	Contact:  Randall Josey 
30 April 2008 	(504) 736 2409 
Manually Operated Drains 
Recently a pollution event occurred in the OCS waters when a cleaning crew inadvertently 
bumped open one of the drain valves on the heater treater, allowing approximately one barrel 
(bbl) of oil to drain to the overboard line and into the Gulf of Mexico (GOM).  The investigation 
revealed the heater treater had been improperly installed after the water polishing unit was taken 
out of service.  The heater treater was equipped with manually operated drains that were used to 
drain water and sand from the bottom of the vessel.  The drains had individual 2” manual valves 
and were manifolded together. A single line from the drain manifold was piped directly to the 
skimmer’s overboard line and it bypassed all upstream water treating equipment.  One of the 
drains was inadvertently bumped open allowing oil to drain to the overboard line and into the 
GOM. 
The MMS recommends the following: 
•	 Manual drains used to drain the bottom of pressure vessels should be piped to water/sand 
treating equipment prior to discharge to an open ended sump or overboard.  Title 30 CFR 
250.300(a) states, in part, the following: “*** the lessee shall take measures to prevent 
unauthorized discharge of pollutants into the offshore waters.  The lessee shall not create 
conditions that will pose unreasonable risk to public health, life, property, aquatic life, 
wildlife, recreation, navigation, commercial fishing, or other uses of the ocean.***”- 
•	 When making modifications to surface production equipment on an offshore platform, 
operators should implement a management-of-change (MOC) program.  A thorough 
MOC program would establish procedures to identify and control all hazards associated 
with process changes and maintain the accuracy of safety information.  In this case, the 
use of a MOC process may have identified the introduction  of the possible hazard of 
pollution when the water polishing unit was taken out of service.  This in turn may have 
prevented the heater treater drain line from being piped directly overboard.  
--MMS--GOMR--
www.gomr.mms.gov 