

 
Safety Alert No. 505 
Date: Aug. 11, 2025 
Contact: bseepublicaffairs@bsee.gov 
Phone: (800) 200-4853 
BSEE Risk-Based Inspections Reveal Increase in 
Slip-Trip-Fall Hazards on Offshore Facilities 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
Background: The Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement (BSEE) Gulf of America 
Region (GOAR) identified a potential risk associated with slips, trips and falls (STFs) across 
the Outer Continental Shelf (OCS) between May 2024 and April 2025. During this period, 
22% of all injuries reported to BSEE were attributed to STFs, surpassing lifting-related 
injuries for the first time in recent years. These STF injuries were often severe, resulting in 
major injuries defined as three or more days away from work, restricted work, or job 
transfer. 
In response to the rise in operator and contractor injuries, BSEE initiated a Performance-
Based Risk Inspection (PBRI). The inspection covered 19 assets, including production 
platforms and well operations, across the Gulf. These assets were operated by 17 unique 
operators. 
Incident Findings  
Figure 1: An example of tripping hazards aboard an offshore facility. 

 
 
CATEGORY: Personnel Safety 
 
• Training – While a few operators and contractors provided limited computer-based 
training associated with STFs, most of the operators and contractors associated 
with the inspected facilities had no formal training requirements or program for the 
prevention of STFs. 
 
• Hazard Identification / Hunts – Throughout the inspection, offshore personnel 
indicated they had a regular work schedule to clear paths and ensure walkways 
were free from obstructions, which they considered part of their daily operations. 
However, only one Operator provided evidence of a “Start Work Check" that requires 
employees to clear paths and floorways before lifting, pumping, tubular handling 
and high-pressure testing operations.  
 
• Unguarded or Sharp Edges – BSEE inspection teams identified unguarded and sharp 
edges on multiple inspections. These edges could cause severe injuries like cuts, 
lacerations, punctures, and even amputations during STF incidents. 
 
• Mental Focus – Investigation teams reviewed non-reportable incidents from 
operator logs and found that a common cause in multiple STF incidents was the 
lack of attention while walking. An example was walking forward and looking 
upward at the same time. 
 
• Simultaneous Operations – On facilities where simultaneous operations were 
underway, such as construction and well-related activities, working surfaces and 
walkways were inundated with hazards. Inspectors found wet floors with loose, 
flakey rust; hoses and tubing on the ground in front of an egress route and life vest 
box; areas with uneven grating; temporary electrical lines without proper tagging; 
scaffolding and a ladder in the path of an egress route; and metal pipe and tubing on 
the deck floor that was not anchored down or properly stored. BSEE inspectors 
identified all these hazards, not contract or operator personnel, during pre-job 
hazard hunts, toolbox talks, or in job-specific Job Safety Analysis (JSA). 
 
• Safety Boots – The inspection confirmed most operators and contractors had safety 
boot policies in place that covered ANSI Z41-1999 and ASTM F2413 
recommendations. However, little evidence was provided on boot inspection 
programs implemented on the OCS to ensure the boots were in safe working order. 
 
• Marking of Obstructions / Contrast and Visibility - Contrasting colors and surface 
markings were used where applicable; however, BSEE inspectors identified areas 

 
 
CATEGORY: Personnel Safety 
 
that needed improvement, which the operator corrected. A recent 20-foot fall down 
stairs and a trip over a deck penetration were also attributed to faded paint on the 
grating, and a lack of contrasting colors to help identify the hazard. 
To help prevent similar incidents in the future, BSEE recommends that operators and 
their contractors, where appropriate, consider the following:   
• Emphasize the importance of offshore workers remaining alert, especially in high-
risk areas like stairwells, decks, and worksite exits. While on OCS facilities, 
individuals should take a moment to scan their path for potential hazards. Some 
operators presented information on their “20-20-20 rule” – Every 20 minutes, take 20 
seconds to look 20 feet around you, actively searching for any hazards. 
 
• Ensure that high-traffic areas are kept clear of obstruction and maintained in a safe 
condition. Consider utilizing IOGP’s Start Work Checks to ensure safeguards are 
implemented to prevent STFs by workers at the job location before work 
commences. 
   
• Evaluate OSHA’s regulations (29 CFR 1910 Subpart D) for walking and working 
surfaces and consider developing formalized training requirements that address the 
causes of slips, trips and falls and how to avoid them. 
 
• Require all offshore personnel to wear appropriate foot protection and have 
programs in place to ensure they inspect and maintain the soles to achieve firm 
traction. Operators should follow 33 CFR 142.33 and ensure foot protection for 
personnel is adequate for their duties. 
 
• Review the work activities on all OCS facilities and bring awareness to walkways 
with a larger equipment presence (generators, pumps, scaffolding, hoses, etc.). 
Additionally, operators on fixed and floating offshore facilities should review United 
States Coast Guard Regulations 33 CFR Part 142 - Workplace Safety and Health. 
 
• Complete walk-downs of their platforms and identify all sharp or unguarded edges. 
If any are identified, mitigation measures should be implemented to reduce the risk 
of cuts or lacerations during a STF event. 
– BSEE – 
 
A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations that 
could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 