

 
SAFETY ALERT 
Contact: bseepublicaffairs@bsee.gov 
Phone: (800) 200-4853 
  
  
 
 
 
BSEE Urges Establishing and Communicating 
Enhanced Safety Protocols Ahead of Adverse Weather 
 
Figure 1. Fantail areas of deepwater drilling rig where wave knocked worker down. 
The Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement (BSEE) recently investigated an 
incident where rough sea conditions posed sudden and unpredictable risks. In addition, 
BSEE received multiple incident reports in November and December 2024, identifying 
adverse weather conditions as the primary contributing factor. This safety alert is being 
provided as a reminder to establish and clearly communicate enhanced safety 
measures in anticipation of adverse weather. 
An offshore worker on a deepwater drilling rig was heading to assist personnel in 
pressure washing operations. Observing the job had been completed and the team was 
wrapping up, the worker then walked to the stern of the vessel toward the fantail to 
observe waves from the handrails. While standing at the handrail, a wave crashed over, 
knocking the worker back approximately 20 feet, potentially coming into contact with a 
bollard before landing at the base of the stairs (Figure1). As a result of the incident, the 
worker sustained a fracture to the right upper leg femur.    
  
 
Safety Alert No. 497 
March 7, 2025 

 
 
On the morning of the incident, it was noted that sea conditions were noticeably 
worsening. The aft deck (stern) was secured, and crane operations were suspended in 
response. Despite not having any active duties or assignments in that location, the 
offshore worker made a personal decision to access the stern to observe the water. The 
decision to access a secured area put the worker in a location vulnerable to the impact 
of the wave, which directly led to their injury. The rough sea conditions were the primary 
contributing factor, as the rough seas presented sudden and unpredictable risks. The 
root cause of this incident was the weather 
Additional incidents reported to BSEE in November and December 2024, where the root 
cause was determined to be weather:  
• An offshore worker was attempting to swing from a boat landing to the back of a 
motor vessel when a large wave came through and pushed the stern of the boat 
under the boat landing. When the stern came loose, the worker lost balance and 
fell on the deck, injuring a knee. 
 
• Operators were transferring personnel from a motor vessel onto a production 
platform. During the transfer, a rogue sea swell caused the boat to collide with 
the boat landing, damaging the west side of the facility. 
 
• A motor vessel was preparing to use dynamic positioning (DP) to offload 
personnel onto a facility. During this process, the vessel temporarily lost its DP 
capability, and a sea swell pushed it toward the boat landing. As a result, the 
bulwark and jump deck were pushed beneath the personnel landing area on the 
facility, causing damage to the vessel.  
BSEE recommends that operators and their contractors, where appropriate, do 
the following: 
• Determine if there should be restricted areas on the facility during adverse 
weather conditions and communicate these locations to all personnel during pre-
tour and other relevant meetings.  
• Place additional restricted access signs and/or hard barriers around the facility 
based on weather-related restrictions set by the offshore facility leadership. 
 
• Ensure personnel are aware of hazards from unlikely sources that could be 
present during extreme weather events with unpredictable conditions (seas, 
winds, etc.). 
 
• Determine when non-critical work should be suspended due to unfavorable 
conditions to prioritize safety. 

 
 
• Assess medical evacuation capabilities and challenges for and during adverse 
weather conditions.  
• Review BSEE Safety Alert 363 - Injury Occurs when Non-evacuated Personnel 
Enter Weather-restricted Area, BSEE Safety Alert 392 - Personnel Transfer 
Injuries Escalate Over 1-Year Period, and BSEE Safety Alert 456 - Extreme 
Caution Advised During Swing Rope Transfers in conjunction with this Safety 
Alert.  
 
– BSEE – 
 
 
A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations that 
could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
 
 
Category: General; Weather 