U.S. Department of the Interior
Minerals Management Service
Gulf of Mexico OCS Region
Notice No. 180
March 4, 1999
CONTACT: Felix Dyhrkopp
(504) 736-2893
Deepwater Gulf of Mexico OCS Currents
You are advised of the possible existence of significant Gulf of Mexico (GOM) deepwater currents that could
affect offshore operations and facility designs. The Minerals Management Service (MMS) has become aware
proprietary, site-specific measurements recorded over a 2-year period in Gulf of Mexico Outer ContinentalShelf
waters 6,000 feet deep. Those measurements seem to indicate the presence of currents with velocities
approaching one knot and which extend from a level 3,000 feet below the water surface down to the seafloor.
Early data indicate that these deep currents are not the result of (or induced by) loop current eddies that
circulate throughout the GOM.
In response to the initial findings from those proprietary studies and to concerns regarding the potential impact
of such currents on OCS operations, MMS is preparing to fund a 1-year current measurement program (with
options to extend it to 2 years). Such a field investigation will attempt to replicate the measurements from the
proprietary studies. The MMS is also exploring the possibility of second current measurement program in the
same water depth at a site several miles to the west of the first site. The MMS hopes such work will be
undertaken as part of a joint industry project to confirm the existence (or absence) of the reported currentsand
provide information regarding changes in current structure and magnitude as these currents move laterally
across the Gulf of Mexico in an east-west direction.
Parallel to this research effort, MMS is gathering information about the drilling and production experiences to
date in water depths beyond 5,000 feet as a way to determine if there has been any indication of these deep
currents affecting activities. Operators planning operations in deepwater areas of the Gulf of Mexico should be
prepared to discuss the possible existence of such currents and the impact they may have on planned
operations. The MMS is particularly interested about the effect such currents will have on equipment designand
installation. Specifically, the effects on both seabed equipment and the production riser are concerns MMS has
for deepwater development projects.
of
—GOMR—MMS—
MMS
Internet Homepage: http://www.gomr.mms.gov
Deepwater Gulf of Mexico OCS Currentshttp://www.gomr.boemre.gov/homepg/offshore/safety/safealt/sa_180...
1 of 12/21/2012 4:15 PM