

 
Safety Alert No. 401                               Contact: Jason Mathews       
October 14, 2020                                            Phone: (504) 731-1496 
 
 BSEE Identifies Improvements to Hurricane Preparedness 
During Risk Based Inspections 
                                                              
In June 2020, the Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement (BSEE) reviewed the 
hurricane plans and preparations of five offshore operators accounting for 59% of manned 
facilities in the Gulf of Mexico. In conjunction with the hurricane/tropical storm season, these 
evaluations  were  initiated  in  response  to  concerns  in  previous  years  about  personnel  
remaining on offshore facilities during unsafe weather conditions. In May 2020, the National 
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration predicted that the 2020 Atlantic hurricane season 
would be more severe than normal, and the season is already on record pace for frequency. 
 
 
 
All assessed operators had executed hurricane preparedness plans. However, areas for 
improvement were identified in decision-making processes and communication protocols.  
Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators and contractors consider the following: 
•    Prior to each hurricane season, complete the following: 
o   Review hurricane preparedness and emergency evacuation plans to ensure 
they are accurate and up to date; 
o   Update all personnel rosters, emergency contact information, and facility lists; 
SAFETY ALERT 
 
 
A map shows the path of Tropical Storm Cristobal in early June 2020. The expected impact of a tropical 
storm is 25 miles to the west and 50 miles to the east of the center of the storm. 

A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations 
that could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
 
o   Verify contact information for pipeline companies, support services and 
government representatives; 
o   Distribute updated documents to all field locations and shorebases; and, 
o   Verify that enough tie -down supplies are available to secure loose items 
stored on decks. 
•    Cover emergency response and rescue plans at pre-tour meetings offshore during 
hurricane season (June 1 to November 30), and notify BSEE if offshore inspection 
and testing requirements cannot be met due to weather-related interruptions; 
•    If personnel must evacuate a facility, complete the following before departure: 
o   Drain piping, vessels and storage tanks to the lowest levels; 
o   Remove or secure all loose items on deck;  
o   Take hard copies of important documents that are not available onshore (e.g. 
stability reports, morning reports, red-line drawings, LOTO documentation, 
bypass logs); and, 
o   Notify BSEE that production for the facility has been shut in. 
•    Conduct regular drills and tests of your hurricane preparedness plans, including 
scenarios where the primary means of communication are hindered; 
•    Review post-storm assessment forms to ensure that they are consistent and capture 
all information required to make determinations of facility status/condition; 
•    Develop procedures and checklists for safe boarding prior to re-manning facilities 
with potential storm damage. Personnel conducting these damage assessments 
should not work alone; 
•    Prepare for medical evacuation flights to be severely delayed or not available during 
hurricanes or bad weather. Facilities that lack onsite medical personnel should 
consider training offshore personnel in Advanced Life Support care;  
•    Develop procedures for personnel to safely shelter-in-place and review the 
recommendations in Safety Alert 363
, which addresses related hazards; 
•    Consider installing video cameras on floating facilities to observe the stability 
conditions prior to boarding;  
•    Evaluate facilities per Section 17 of API Recommended Practice 2A-WSD, Planning, 
Designing, and Constructing Fixed Offshore Platforms—Working Stress Design, as 
required by 30 CFR 250.920, to  identify any factors that would prohibit the facility 
from being manned during a hurricane or tropical storm; 
•    Ensure all BSEE hurricane-related Notice to Lessees are reviewed and followed as 
necessary; and, 
•    Consider using drone technology to investigate platforms prior to boarding. 
--BSEE-- 