

Safety Alert No. 344                Contact: Neil Matthews 
6 December 2018               Phone: 337-437-4645 
Chemical Release due to Containment Failure 
On August 12, 2018, an operator reported, via the National Response Center, “a 
release of 70 gallons of emulsion breaker into the Gulf of Mexico due to equipment 
failure of a tank” from its unmanned platform.  This chemical is nominally 
composed of 40% xylene, which equates to 196 lbs. by weight and meets the 
reporting requirements in 30 CFR 254.46. The chemical had been stored in a 
polyethylene tote. 
Location of storage tank (tank on left) at the time of the incident (left photo) and external view of the crack (right photo) 
BSEE investigated the spill and found: 
· The discharge was due to a crack along bottom area of the polyethylene 
tote (see photos). 
· The interior of the tote’s walls showed dimples and reduced wall thickness 
throughout the fluid contact area. 
· The tote was improperly labelled as containing “Corrosive” versus 
“Flammable” contents per the Safety Data Sheet. 
· The secondary containment pan had filled with rain water and was 
incapable of retaining the totes contents. 
SAFETY ALERT 

A Safety Alertis a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding an accident or near miss. It alsocontains recommendations 
that should help prevent the recurrence of such an incident on the Outer Continental 
Shelf.
· The chemical provider states that this emulsion breaker is shipped in 
304/316 stainless steel totes and only should be contained in same or 
polyvinylidene fluoride or polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF) totes.  
Conclusions: 
· The chemical was stored in an improper container, as polyethylene totes 
are incompatible with xylene. The degree of degradation/damage caused 
by improperly storing the emulsion breaker in the polyethylene tote and its 
role in the tote’s failure of primary containment is not known, but is 
considered a contributing cause. 
· The tote was exposed to sun/weather and had been in service for over five 
years.  The exposure to UV/elements may have contributed to the tank’s 
failure. 
· There should be a means for removing rainwater from the secondary 
containment, allowing room to contain any chemical spillage. 
· The tote was improperly labeled which could increase risks to personnel 
and the environment. 
Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators: 
· Ensure the compatibility of storage totes with the chemicals they are 
designated to store, in accordance with the safety data sheet (SDS); 
· Properly label all chemical storage containers; 
· Ensure all personnel are properly trained and fully understand the 
implications of the chemicals used on their facilities; 
· Evaluate and inspect all chemical storage containers and supporting 
structures to ensure they are fit for continued service. 
-- BSEE -- 