

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Safety Alert No. 241 
Contact: Glenn Woltman
July 6, 2006 
(504) 736-2438 
Shallow-Gas Blowout and Rig Evacuation 
While drilling below drive pipe in open water in the South Timbalier area, the operator experienced an 
unexpected gas flow at surface, causing the well to be put into the diverter system.  The uncontrolled flow 
resulted in the short-term rig evacuation of non-essential personnel.  The interval at 1,318 feet had not 
been identified as a shallow-gas hazard, although a higher interval just below the drive pipe shoe had 
been identified.  Closer attention to background gas recordings, mud weight properties in returns, or other 
drilling anomalies might have allowed precautionary actions that could have prevented this loss of well 
control event. 
 To prevent a recurrence of this type of incident, the MMS recommends that operators consider 
incorporating the following into their pre-spud well plan: 
1.	 Review of shallow-gas hazard studies prepared for new wells from previously drilled surface 
locations or in open water should include a study of the old logs, if available, as well as any 
geophysical data.  Drilling personnel should be explicitly warned of shallow-gas deposits 
identified in previously drilled wells.  The potential risks of any drilling project should be fully 
assessed, more so when information is sketchy or data limited, and pilot holes should be 
considered prior to undertaking the drilling of the new well.  Adequate kill weight mud should be 
available in reserve pits at all times during drilling through known or suspected shallow gas 
intervals. 
2.	 Conductor casing or surface casing should be set above all known shallow gas hazard zones.  
Drilling operations should cease immediately upon noting gas shows, appropriate weighted mud 
should be circulated until the gas is out of the hole, and a flow check taken upon each connection.  
If drilling operations continue, flow checks should be made on all connections and mud weight 
in/out measurements noted until the shallow gas intervals are drilled through. 
3.	 Mud weight should be increased slightly through the shallow intervals to enhance well control, 
unless tight margins prevail between pore pressure and fracture pressure.  Personnel should 
monitor and control drilling rate and drilling mud properties.  
—MMS—GOMR— 
Visit our Safety Information Website 
A complete account of the accident is available on the MMS website at 
http://www.gomr.mms.gov/homepg/offshore/safety/acc_repo/accindex.html 