

Contact: bseepublicaffairs@bsee.gov 
Phone: (800) 200-4853 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
Poor Preparation Prior to Hot Work Leads   to Fires
 
 
 
 
Recently,  several fires occurring during hot work have been reported to BSEE. Hot work 
is any job with the potential to create an ignition source, such as an open flame, sparks, 
or high temperatures.  Examples of hot work include welding, using acetylene torches, 
and grinding and cutting metal. 
 
Incident 1: A s a construction crew removed skid pads with a torch on the top deck, slag 
and sparks fell through the grating onto the manway cover of the water skimmer below, 
igniting a fire. The fire self-extinguished shortly thereafter as the fire watch was securing 
a dry chemical fire. The water skimmer had been cleaned a week prior in preparation for 
vessel entry but had not been deemed inert, and the oil dump lines were later found to 
be full of flammable condensate. Although gas was not detected in the area around the 
skimmer before starting work, an 8% lower explosive limit was detected at the manway 
cover later. Workers used fire retardant tarps earlier in the job, but when the workers 
  
 
SAFETY ALERT 
 
 
Fire retardant blankets can be used to protect 
potential hydrocarbon sources if relocation is 
impractical. 
Incident 1: Flammable vapors escaped from the 
manway,  which were ignited by the falling sparks.  
Safety Alert No. 447 
July 26, 2022  

moved to a new location above the water skimmer, they did not take the retardant tarps 
with them. 
 
Incident 2: While cutting grating with an acetylene torch, falling sparks ignited gas 
leaking from a pinhole on a gas sales riser located 15 feet below the grating. The fire 
watch noticed and stopped the job. A worker used a 30-pound ABC fire extinguisher to 
extinguish the flame. Although a gas detector had measured a 0.0% lower explosive 
limit before the work started, the gas leak occurred in an area not easily accessible for 
inspection or gas monitoring. 
 
Incident 3: Before a construction crew removed steel bar grating from beneath a 
building, it was elevated several inches to provide a distance barrier between the 
subfloor and the torch cutting below. Saltwater was used to saturate the subfloor, and 
water was re-applied periodically. The crew finished their work,  and the fire watch 
remained on location for an additional 30 minutes. A fire was noticed on the lower side 
of the building 15 minutes later, which was extinguished with the saltwater hose. It was 
found that the distance barrier may not have been sufficient to prevent a fire, and that 
the combustible surfaces should be saturated with water during the fire watch period as 
well as during the job. 
 
Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators and contractors consider: 
 
•    Using flameproof tarps or other fire-resistant guards to protect equipment from falling 
sparks and excessive heat. Scaffolding may be required to cover elevated areas. 
Refer to 30 CFR § 250.113 for procedures to follow prior to, during, and after welding. 
   
•    Covering and sealing nearby deck and skid drains before starting hot work to prevent 
flammable gases from entering the area. 
  
•    Checking skid pans (visually and with a gas detector) for residual flammable liquids 
and flooding them with water if possible. 
 
•    Designating a fire watch during jobs involving open flames, sparks,  or heat sources. 
Operators should maintain the fire watch for at least 30 minutes after welding activities 
end, recognizing that some jobs may require longer periods. 
 
•    Ensuring the fire watch is positioned well to view all hazardous areas near the hot 
work location.  
 
•    Locating and inspecting the closest fire extinguisher before starting hot work. If an 
extra fire extinguisher is available, move it near the work area before starting the job. 
 

•    Verifying that any nearby vessel previously containing hydrocarbons has been 
properly flushed and deemed inert before starting hot work. 
 
•    Completing a hot work permit and Job Safety Analysis and reviewing them 
immediately before starting the job. All personnel involved with the job should 
participate in this process. 
 
•    Using the facility’s designated safe welding area for hot work when possible, and 
following your BSEE-approved safe welding and burning permit.  
 
•    Using gas detectors to continuously monitor the area and ensuring that flammable 
gases are not present before and during hot work. 
 
•    Testing areas where sparks are likely to fall. Remember: gas detectors may be less 
effective at finding gas leaks   in well-ventilated areas. 
 
•    Calibrating gas detectors regularly,  and bump testing them before each use. 
 
 
–   BSEE – 
 
 
 
 
A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations that 
could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
 
 
Category: Fire  