

 
SAFETY ALERT 
Contact: bseepublicaffairs@bsee.gov 
Phone: (800) 200-4853 
  
  
 
 
 
Investigation of Subsea Leak Identifies the Use of Materials 
Susceptible to Hydrogen Embrittlement 
 
 
 
 
In July 2020, approximately 479 barrels of oil released into the Gulf of Mexico (GOM) 
from a subsea jumper.  A BSEE investigation identified the incident resulted from a 
failed flange connection on the jumper, between the multiphase flowmeter (MPFM) and 
Blind Tee (see Figure).   
The investigation found that the failure was due to the fracture of four of the eight 
fasteners (studs) at the flange connection, which was attributable to hydrogen 
embrittlement (HE).  The fractured studs were composed of the corrosion-resistant 
nickel-based alloy (Inconel 718) which is not alloy steel. Inconel 718 fasteners installed 
in    subsea environments with cathodic protection are susceptible to HE and should 
comply with the following American Petroleum Institute (API) standards to mitigate the 
embrittlement risks: 
  
 
Safety Alert No. 458 
March 7, 2023 
Subsea Jumper Connection Failure Picture 

 
 
• API STD 6ACRA, 1st Edition, August 2015 - Age-hardened Nickel-based 
Alloys for Oil and Gas Drilling and Production Equipment. 
• API SPEC 20F, 2nd Edition, May 2018 - Corrosion-resistant Bolting for Use in 
the Petroleum and Natural Gas Industries. 
The investigation identified the following causes of the incident:   
• Failure to install API 6ACRA compliant studs in the jumper flange 
connection. 
• Engineering documentation used for procurement did not specify API 
6ACRA compliance for subsea flange fasteners (studs and nuts). 
• Gap in the quality assurance/quality control (QA/QC) process allowed for non-
API 6ACRA-compliant subsea flange fastener installation.  
• Management of change (MOC) process was not followed. 
Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators and contractors consider the 
following: 
• Review BSEE GC40 Panel Report. 
• Utilize an industry-knowledgeable metallurgist to evaluate all current and 
future subsea fasteners to verify fasteners are fit for service and not prone to 
Hydrogen Embrittlement (HE) or any other environmental cracking failures. 
For future installations, ensure the metallurgical evaluation is performed 
during the engineering technical review phase before releasing the 
engineering design for construction. 
• Share Subsea Leak Detection (SSLD) system learnings with industry. 
• Emphasize that company, contract, and sub-contract personnel enact MOC 
when there are modifications associated with equipment, operating 
procedures, personnel changes, materials, and operating conditions. 
• Validate and document flange fastener make-up torque values. 
• Ensure SSLD notification system alarms are appropriately set with effective 
alerts and properly monitored during shut-in, transient and steady state 
production operating conditions.  
• Consider the subsea leak potential while investigating significant subsea 
flowline pressure drops even when the pressure trends are above the 
ambient pressure of the sea. 

 
 
The Panel encourages industry to develop a standard means for determining shear 
and torsional capacities of API flange connections. 
 
 
 
– BSEE – 
 
 
A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations that 
could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
 
 
Category: Spill/Pollution 