

   
 
   
 
 
Safety Alert No. 393                               Contact: Jason Mathews       
September 23, 2020                             Phone: (504) 731-1496 
 
 
Adverse Weather and Sea Conditions Complicate Dynamic Lifts
  
                                                           
An uptick of incidents in the Gulf of Mexico have occurred involving offloading/backloading 
cargo to  and  from  offshore  facilities,  work  boats,  marine vessels  (M/Vs),  and offshore 
supply vessels. For many operators, these dynamic lifts are classified within the category 
of  critical  lifts,  which  require  additional  hazards,  such  as  deck  height,  wind  speed,  wave  
height, and worker positioning, to be considered when conducting a task. Several incidents 
in  April  2020,  as  detailed  below,  emphasize  the  importance  of  considering  all  potential  
hazards when preparing for a dynamic lift: 
 
 
1.  While backloading a nitrogen bottle rack to a M/V, the crane operator set the bottle 
rack on the boat’s deck. When a worker on the M/V deck began to remove the 
stinger from the bottle rack, a sudden ocean swell shifted the load, causing the 
stinger to  inadvertently lift the bottle rack slightly above the M/V deck. When the 
swell subsided, the rack landed on the worker's left foot, causing injury. 
 
2.  While backloading a supply box onto a M/V, the load struck the boat's gangway, 
breaking one of the pipe supports. The crane operator was able to land the load 
safely following the impact. After the event, the crane operator said he miscalculated 
how high the load was off the deck when he was attempting to set it down. 
SAFETY ALERT 
 
 
      A nitrogen bottle rack on a marine vessel, as referenced in incident 1. 

   
 
A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations 
that could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
 
 
3.  A platform crane operator lowered a stinger to hook up to a work basket to continue 
offloading supplies from a M/V when a wave caused the vessel to  shift downward. 
As a result, the hook of the stinger caught the inside of the basket and slid it, pinning 
a M/V worker against the rail of the boat. The crane operator was able to move the 
basket enough for the worker to get out from behind the load, but the worker 
sustained a bruise to his left leg. 
Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators and contractors consider the following: 
• Consider adding a specific dynamic lift checklist to the Job Safety Analysis prior to 
making lifts to and from a M/V. Factors to include in the checklist should include, 
but not be limited to, wind speed, wind direction, sea state, visibility, and load 
characteristics;  
• Re-evaluate the current environmental conditions immediately before starting a lift 
and adjust operations accordingly; 
• Emphasize the use, right, and responsibility of Stop Work Authority to all crew 
members, especially those involved with dynamic lifts, regardless of rank or level 
of participation during the lifting operation; 
• Consider inspecting the load and slings for adequate working condition;  
• Verify up-to-date certifications (i.e. weights, dimensions, etc.) prior to a lift    and 
ensure the information is accurately captured on the manifest before commencing 
transportation; 
• Ensure supervision of a lift focuses on worker positioning and deck spacing as it 
pertains to the motion and final destination of the load; 
• Thoroughly review this Safety Alert in conjunction with Safety Alert No. 383
, which 
addresses recent tote tank lifting incidents; and, 
• Verify a crane’s minimum hook speed is sufficient to avoid a load hitting a M/V 
when a wave crests, as summarized in Table B.4.3.3
 in API Specification 2C. 
 
--BSEE-- 