

Contact: bseepublicaffairs@bsee.gov 
Phone: (800) 200-4853 
Flexible Intermediate Bulk Container (FIBC) 
Parted Straps Result in Near Misses 
In the latter part of Calendar Year 2021, numerous incidents occurred in the Gulf of 
Mexico involving  the failure of FIBC
1
straps during lifting  operations. The incident 
details include the following: 
·September 2021: An FIBC containing blasting operations material was lifted
out of a cargo basket by the platform crane using its pre-manufactured
straps. Upon moving the load out and away from the cargo basket, one of the
straps failed (Figure 2),  transferring the weight of the load to the other strap,
which subsequently failed due to exceeding its load capacity. The FIBC
dropped 5 feet onto the deck grating below (Figure 1).
·September 2021: While a forklift was lifting an FBIC containing lost
circulation material for drilling operations, tension on the FIBC straps
caused two of the four straps to part. The FIBC was not dropped from an
1
 FIBCs in industry are more commonly known as Bulk Bags or Super Sacks® 
Figure 2. Broken FIBC Strap 
Safety Alert No. 428 
February 17, 2022 
SAFETY ALERT 
Figure 1. FIBC Load trav  el    Path from the Cargo Basket to the 
Drop Zone 17 Feet Away 

elevation as the load never became suspended. However, the accelerated 
whiplash due to the straps failing resulted in the FIBC spilling a gallon of its 
dry chemical contents onto the deck. Personnel promptly cleaned up the 
material in the area. 
·October 2021: In preparation to trip and lay-out drillpipe, drill floor personnel 
communicated the need for additional thread protectors. The crane crew 
rigged up an FIBC containing multiple thread protectors to be transported to 
the nearby pipe rack area. The crane operator swung the load slightly over 
the pipe rack when the designated signal person observed the straps 
breaking and the FIBC ripping apart. Two thread protectors fell out of the 
FIBC onto the pipe rack six feet below. No crew members were in the drop 
zone at the time of the incident. 
The primary contributing factor associated with these failures is the prolonged 
exposure of the FIBCs to inclement weather and other natural elements, resulting in 
their rapid degradation and subsequent failures. A recurring conclusion from the 
incident investigations suggested that the FIBCs were saturated with water and had 
debris on their outer linings due to Hurricane Ida in early September 2021. 
Additionally, polypropylene is the primary component used to manufacture FIBCs, 
which is known to deteriorate over time when exposed to ultraviolet light. The lack of 
adequate storage potentially compromised the original integrity of the FIBCs. 
Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators and contractors consider the 
following: 
·Confirm the weight limitation of the FIBC before lifting the load. 
·Establish a Quality Assurance / Quality Control program to ensure FIBCs are 
adequately stored before transportation to minimize any adverse effects from 
weather or ultraviolet light. 
·Ensure FIBCs are kept out of the cold weather (< 32 deg F) when not       
              in use. Under a heavy load or unevenly distributed load in below freezing      
              temperatures, the straps can become brittle, which could lead to a loss of the    
              load when lifted. 
·Create a mechanism for tracking the transportation process of FIBCs from 
the shipyard to the facility to confirm they are maintained in a safe condition. 
·Generate an inspection protocol and remove the FIBC from service before 
lifting if any degradation is observed in the pre-manufactured straps.. 
·Emphasize during safety meetings before the job that the force applied to 
each FIBC strap is equally distributed to prevent overloading. 
·Update applicable policies and procedures to include alternative lifting 
methods, such as transferring FIBC material via pre-slung baskets instead of 
utilizing the pre-manufactured FIBC straps. 

·Ensure a 4-point lifting technique is applied to the FIBC straps to maintain the 
integrity of the load as designed in place of utilizing a single-point lift. 
·Confirm the contents in the FIBC are compatible with all FIBC components 
before offloading to the facility. FIBCs may not be the approved storage 
device for some materials, as certain products may have an adverse effect on 
their overall integrity. 
A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations that 
could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
Category: Cranes/Lifting 