

Page 1 of 3 
 
Contact: bseepublicaffairs@bsee.gov 
Phone: (800) 200-4853 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
Drawworks Parking Brake Failure 
 
 
In early 2021, a rig crew unsuccessfully attempted to set the drawworks parking brake. 
Following the incident, the crew was unable to replicate the failure. As a result, a 
technician replaced the parking brake actuator valve and successfully tested the brake 
to verify validity of the repair. The crew then proceeded with well work operations.  
   
After operating for approximately three hours, the driller set the drawworks parking 
brake using the panel actuator knob and released the brake handle. With the saver sub 
already made up into the stand, the driller then applied torque to the connection, via the 
top drive control panel. After applying a minimum amount of torque, the parking brake 
failed again. This failure caused the traveling block to descend 5 feet and damage a 
stand of drill pipe. The driller quickly reengaged the brake handle stopping the traveling 
block. 
 
Following the incident, the rig maintenance crew disassembled, inspected, and replaced 
components within the brake hydraulic power unit. Among the replaced components 
was a solenoid valve which had minor damage to the spool.  
  
 
Safety Alert No. 425 
August 16, 2021  
SAFETY ALERT 
 
 

Page 2 of 3 
 
Upon completion of the repairs, the crew tested the system multiple times, completed a 
commissioning checklist, and received successful test results. The original equipment 
manufacturer’s engineering department assessed the corrective actions taken. The 
manufacturer expressed confidence the system had been returned to the original 
designed intent and was safe for use.  
 
Three days later, the drawworks parking brake failed to engage for the third time. This 
time, the driller noticed the “Emergency Caliper Pressure” gauge did not drop to zero 
pressure indicating the parking brake failed to engage. The operation was immediately 
stopped before damage could occur. The maintenance team inspected the brake circuit 
and discovered air leaking into the pilot line. 
 
The team was able to simulate the brake failure. The brake would not function as 
designed with a pilot pressure range of 32-40 psi, when the pilot line should have been 
zero pressure. The maintenance crew found the following issues: 1). Cut O-ring on a 
shuttle valve, 2). Internal leaking on the emergency stop piloted valve, 3). Leaking 
crown-o-matic toggle valve.  (See below.) 
 
 
 
After replacing the faulty components, the team successfully functioned the brakes 93 
times and then successfully performed and documented brake endurance testing. 
  
Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators consider:  
 
• Confirming drawworks parking brake engagement by observing desired/required 
pressure on the hydraulic pressure gauge prior to releasing the drawworks 
service brake handle. 
• Installing additional parking brake indicators, such as a visual light indicating the 
brake engagement and/ or an audio alarm indicating failure of the parking brake 
engagement.  

Page 3 of 3 
 
• Establishing testing and appropriate change-out frequencies for critical circuit 
components.  
o Not operating critical circuit components to failure. 
• Maintaining proper preventative maintenance on critical pneumatic components 
to ensure the rig air supply system is dry and free of contaminants and 
particulate matter. 
o Contaminated and/ or wet air supply is known to cause failure on sealing 
surfaces inside pneumatically controlled or operated equipment.   
 
--BSEE-- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of 
the circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains 
recommendations that could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer 
Continental Shelf. 
 
 
Category: drilling  