U.S. Department of the Interior
Minerals Management Service
Gulf of Mexico OCS Region
Safety Alert No. 214
July 15, 2003
Contact: Jack Williams
(504) 731-3012
Flash Fire and Explosion from Inadequately Vented Production Vessel
A work crew initiated a confined space entry into a low-pressure separator to sampleundisturbed sand and
sludge behind the weir.  While the sample was being retrieved, a flash explosion ignited in the vessel, exiting the
open hatch.  The explosion injured four workers, one of whom was blown off the platform.  An MMS
investigation produced panelReport MMS 2003-046, available atwww.gomr.mms.gov/homepg/offshore/safety
/acc_repo/accindex.html
The explosion was caused by the failure to open both hatches, ventilate, and continuously ventilate the vessel
during entry, despite extensive pre-job procedural reviews.  In addition, a gas detector was not deployed
throughout the entire area of entry.  These procedural failures occurred in part because of no managerial
double-check of the actual operation.  The injuries were caused by the explosion’s impact on personnel inside
the vessel and immediately outside the open hatch.  One man struck the guardrail cyclone fence material,
springing it loose from its frame, before falling into the water.  No flotation aidswere thrown to him.
The MMS recommends to Operators the following actions:
The operators should emphasize proper confined space entry procedure in the pre-job safety meetings
and have a second party confirm the procedures are being followed;
Personnel not involved in a particular confined space entry should be made aware of the potential danger
areas immediately outside any open hatchway of a vessel;
Work crews should be reminded in safety meetings of the location of emergency flotation devices and the
need to access them first in a man-overboard situation;
Operators should review guard barrier ability to contain standard impacts, especiallyin the vicinity of
major production equipment, vessels, and work areas.
  —MMS—GOMR—
www.gomr.mms.gov
Visit our Safety Information Website
Safety Alert No. 214 - Flash Fire and Explosion from Inadequately Ve...http://www.gomr.boemre.gov/homepg/offshore/safety/safealt/SA_214...
1 of 12/21/2012 4:39 PM