

 
SAFETY ALERT 
Contact: bseepublicaffairs@bsee.gov 
Phone: (800) 200-4853 
  
  
 
 
 
Risk of Exposure to Elevated Carbon Monoxide Found in 
Offshore Environments 
             
 
Recent inspections conducted by the Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement 
(BSEE) found concerning carbon monoxide (CO) exposure risks associated with gas-
powered machinery on offshore facilities. These risks are notably prevalent during calm 
weather conditions with light winds, enabling CO to ascend from lower decks. There is a 
potential for CO to accumulate in isolated areas, corridors, and even enter 
environmental control intakes, putting personnel at risk of critical CO exposure. 
Several inspections conducted during calm weather events revealed alarmingly 
elevated CO levels within living quarters, control rooms, galley areas, and other spaces 
across various offshore facilities. Exposure to high levels of CO can lead to symptoms 
mirroring those illustrated in the image above, with severe exposure cases having the 
potential to be fatal.   
Some of the commonly used stationary CO gas detection devices on offshore facilities 
have alarm thresholds set at a minimum of 70 parts-per-million (ppm)
1
 for over an hour 
and 150 ppm for 10-50 minutes before triggering an alarm. This poses a significant risk 
of prolonged exposure to CO well beyond allowable limits, potentially resulting in severe 
 
1
 PPM or Parts Per Million is a unit used to describe very small concentrations of a substance in a larger 
solution. PPM means 1 per every 1,000,000 or 1/1,000,000. 
  
 
Safety Alert No. 473 
Nov. 14, 2023 
Figure 1: A carbon monoxide warning sign. 
Figure 2: Symptoms of carbon monoxide sickness. 

 
 
health consequences. Regularly calibrated portable/personal four-way gas detectors are 
considered the most reliable means of detecting CO accumulations, especially in areas 
that might otherwise go undetected. 
In light of these recent findings, necessary actions must be taken to mitigate such 
exposure events. It is    imperative to conduct assessments of various machinery emitting 
CO to identify potential exposure risks. Additionally, it is essential for individuals to 
familiarize themselves with exposure limits and recognize potentially harmful exposure 
incidents.  
Furthermore, it is crucial to adhere to the exposure standards established by the 
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) and the Occupational 
Safety and Health Administration (OSHA). These standards include: 
• NIOSH time-weighted average (TWA) limits of 35 ppm with an upper limit of 200 
ppm.  
• OSHA sets the TWA at 50 ppm. 
• OSHA Permissible Exposure Limit (PEL) for CO, also set at 50 ppm. 
• OSHA standards that prohibit worker exposure to more than 50 ppm during an  
8-hour period. 
• The 8-hour PEL for CO in maritime operations is also 50 ppm. 
• Additionally, maritime workers must be removed from exposure if the ambient 
CO concentration exceeds 100 ppm.  
 
In accordance with 29 CFR 1926. 55 (a)-(b), employee exposure must be limited, 
and engineering controls methods should be implemented to mitigate exposure 
to hazardous substances, including CO. Therefore, it is advisable to follow the 
procedures outlined in 29 CFR 1926.57 (a)-(d)(2) for CO emissions, with specific 
attention to 29 CFR 1926.57(f)(1)(viii) as a guide for effective ventilation practices to 
mitigate exposure to harmful substances. 
In addition to the above, BSEE recommends that operators and their contractors, 
where appropriate, consider doing the following: 
• Ensuring ventilation is properly functioning and backup sources of ventilation are 
available. Ventilation should move the CO away from heavily trafficked areas, 
living quarters, and offices, preferably to a higher area to minimize the risk of 
exposure. 

 
 
• Regularly verifying the integrity of exhaust piping to ensure it is correctly 
configured, free from obstructions, and well-maintained. Routinely inspecting this 
configuration to confirm the absence of corrosion, holes, or any other damage.  
• Ensuring personnel are aware of CO poisoning and illnesses, can recognize the 
symptoms, and know the treatments.  
• Using signage or other clearly identifiable means to call attention to the areas 
prone to create CO, such as generators, gas-powered equipment, etc.  
• Planning and placement of CO-exhausting machinery should be carefully 
considered so that CO cannot accumulate in high traffic or living areas directly 
above machinery. If unable to change the configuration, pipe the CO away from 
these areas.  
• Ensuring that any gas detection equipment is regularly inspected, maintained, 
calibrated, and properly worn by all personnel aboard the offshore facility.  
•    Regularly reviewing NIOSH and OSHA CO occupational exposure information 
found in the NIOSH Workplace CO Exposure and OSHA CO Fact Sheet
. 
  
 
– BSEE – 
 
 
A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a    potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations that 
could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
 
 
Category: Gas Release, Living Quarters, Chemical Exposure, Personnel Safety 