U.S. Department of the Interior
Minerals Management Service
Gulf of Mexico OCS Region
Safety Alert No. 181
April 28, 1999
Contact: Tommy Laurendine
504-736-5709
Rig Collapse with Fatalities and Injuries
During the final stages of rigging-up operations, a platform rig collapsed, resultingin 3 fatalities and 13 injuries.
The rig, which consisted of an upper, intermediate, and lower substructure, was aligned transversely to the
platform’s skidding beams and supported by shimming, support, and false capping beams. The aforementioned
supporting beams did not extend to the end of the lower and intermediate substructures. As the upper
substructure was skidded, in preparation for the derrick positioning and raising, towithin a foot of its targeted
position, the underlying substructures tilted and slid to the side to which the skidding was directed. As a result of
that movement, the upper substructure and other rig components fell into the Gulf, 3employees fell to their
deaths, and 13 employees were injured.
During the skidding operation, the upper substructure had reached a point where its center of gravity had moved
sufficiently past the last support beam so that the moment of the weight of the uppersubstructure acting through
its center of gravity about the last support beam was greater than the summation of the countering moments of
the weights of the intermediate and lower substructures about the same support beam.This imbalance
physically caused the substructures to move as described above. Other causes are listed in the MMS report on
this accident.
Therefore, from this information and information contained in the referenced MMS report, the following are
recommended for those cases where a drilling rig is not using the platform’s skiddingbeams in a traditional
manner and also in which rig substructures are used with a platform/substructure support beam interface:
The drilling contractor develop an official written procedural guideline that detailsall engineering-related
aspects of the installation of the rig,
a.
The operator be familiar with the procedural guideline and have onsite during installation a representative
to ensure compliance with the guideline, and
b.
The operator and contractor in conjunction hire an independent consultant to verify the correctness and
sufficiency of all engineering analyses related to the installation of the rig.
c.
For details of the accident, see OCS Report MMS 99-0027. Copies of the report may beobtained from the
MMS Public Information Office located at 1201 Elmwood Park Boulevard, New Orleans, Louisiana 70123
(1-800-200-GULF or local 504-736-2519).
—GOMR—MMS—
MMS Internet Homepage: http://www.gomr.mms.gov
Deepwater Gulf of Mexico OCS Currentshttp://www.gomr.boemre.gov/homepg/offshore/safety/safealt/SA_181...
1 of 12/21/2012 4:15 PM