

 
SAFETY ALERT 
Contact: bseepublicaffairs@bsee.gov 
Phone: (800) 200-4853 
  
  
 
 
 
Improperly Depressurizing Piping  
to Remove a Hydrate Causes Injury 
                   
 
Figure 1: Location of Injured Person (IP) and valve assembly 
The following incident serves as a precautionary example of the potential hazards 
associated with improperly depressurizing piping to remove a hydrate. 
During production operations, a control room operator observed a decrease in gas lift 
pressure that was supplied through a pipeline to a remote well location. The control 
room operator notified the onboard platform operators of the pressure drop and the 
possibility of a hydrate forming inside of the 3-inch gas lift piping. To remove the 
possible hydrate, the control room operator and platform operators planned to isolate 
and bleed the pressure. From his station, the control room operator closed the pipeline 
shutdown valve (SDV) upstream of the manual flow control valve. Additionally, the 
platform operators physically closed the manual isolation valve upstream of the SDV, 
assumed hydrate location, and departing pipeline. The platform operators then started 
to relieve the pressure downstream of the hydrate location to atmospheric pressure, 
  
 
Safety Alert No. 484 
April 16, 2024 
Valve assembly 
IP 

 
 
without properly isolating the pipeline from the bleed point, through a ball valve 
assembly attached to the 3-inch gas lift piping. The ball valve assembly consisted of a 
threadolet, threaded steel pipe nipples, two 1-inch ball valves inline, and a 90-degree 
elbow that pointed upward. With approximately 900 psi trapped behind the valve, the 
assembly separated from the threadolet, striking one of the platform operators under the 
left arm pit area, causing bruising and swelling. The injured offshore worker was sent for 
medical treatment and was later released to full duty. The valve assembly could not be 
found and is suspected to have fallen overboard after striking the worker. 
Hydrates can form inside a pipe from a concentration of impurities, natural gas, flow 
conditions, high pressure, and low temperature. At the time of the incident, the 
operators onboard the facility were injecting methanol at a rate of 5 quarts per day to 
prevent hydrate formation. A Job Safety Analysis (JSA) was not performed, so the 
hazards of relieving pressure to remove a hydrate were never discussed. The cause of 
the dislodged valve assembly is still under investigation. 
BSEE recommends that operators and their contractors, where appropriate, 
consider doing the following: 
• Isolating all energy sources; then bleeding pressure upstream and downstream 
of the hydrate simultaneously, maintaining the same amount of pressure so that 
the hydrate does not move and cause a pressure surge, which could damage 
associated piping. 
• Verifying that JSAs identify potential hazards and mitigating those hazards for the 
task being performed. 
 
• Ensuring that when changes to equipment are made all hazards are identified 
and mitigated through the Management of Change process, and updating facility 
information and informing all personnel affected by the change(s). 
 
• Using gas dehydration systems to remove water vapors to reduce the risk of 
hydrate formation inside of piping. 
 
• Verifying current platform configurations are reflected on piping and 
instrumentation diagrams. 
 
 
– BSEE – 
 
 
A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations that 
could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
 
 
Category: Process piping 