

Load with incorrect weight recorded on manifest and wire rope with damage. 
 
Contact: bseepublicaffairs@bsee.gov 
Phone: (800) 200-4853 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
Miscommunication of Load Weight Leads to a High Potential 
Lifting Near Miss 
 
A crane offloading cargo struggled with the weight of a load being lifted from a supply 
vessel. The supply vessel had already pulled away, leaving the operator no option but 
to complete the lift and set the basket down the platform deck. The crane was shut 
down. Upon inspection, it was discovered that the wire rope was damaged in two spots. 
The manifest listed the load weight of 4,300 pounds, but the load was approximately 
8,500 pounds. The load chart showed the crane was rated for 6,650 pounds at any 
angle. Further investigation found that the dock had mistakenly labeled the load as 
4,300 pounds due to miscommunication over an intercom. Additionally, the basket 
weight tag was not changed and included the weight for an empty basket.   
 
      
 
  
 
Safety Alert No. 422 
August 10, 2021  
SAFETY ALERT 
 
 

Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators and contractors consider the 
following: 
• Audit the logistics and coordination of shipments and loading from the shore 
base. 
• Request and review cargo manifests to the affected offshore facility prior to 
shipment, showing both the loads and their weights (if over 5,000 pounds). 
Communicate this information to the crane operator so that he/she may prepare 
for the lift(s).   
• Verify loads exceeding 5,000 pounds are clearly marked on both the load and the 
cargo manifest before placing the load on the boat.  
• Consider color and shape marking labels of certain weights, and where possible, 
ensure the markings are visible from the crane.  
• Verify that an assessment of the condition of the slings and rigging is included in 
pre-use / pre-lift inspections, since loads of equipment that are pre-slung from 
rental companies are not always checked by the transport company dock crew or 
boat crew.  
• Check the load weight indicator to verify the load does not exceed the cranes 
recommended load weight and ensure the basket weight tag reflects the weight 
of a loaded basket. 
• Cranes that have exceeded their rated capacity should be removed from service, 
inspected, and tested by certified crane mechanics to verify that the crane was 
not damaged. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of 
the circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It   also contains 
recommendations that could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer 
Continental Shelf. 
 
 
Category: Lifting  