

 
SAFETY ALERT 
Contact: bseepublicaffairs@bsee.gov 
Phone: 800.200.4853 
  
 
 
 
Fingerboard Locking Bolt Failure Leads to Near Miss 
Incident 
The Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement (BSEE) recently investigated a 
high potential near miss incident that took place on a drilling rig during cement line 
pressure testing. Six stands of 6 5/8-inch pipe fell from the finger row and landed on the 
starboard side deck of the derrick (pictures below). Weather conditions at the time of the 
incident were 40 knot winds, heavy rain, and 8-10-foot seas. There were no personnel 
on the rig floor at the time of the incident. 
                               
 
BSEE investigators determined the adverse weather conditions and the poor design of 
the casing fingerboard system to be main causes of the incident. The flip over beam 
locking bolt was not secure, and loosened during the adverse weather (see Figure 1 
below). With new locking bolt arrangements with improved functionality, operators can 
adjust the width of the row by flip-over beams that consist of a hinged square hollow 
steel profile, or a steel plate. The adjustments can be made remotely or manually.  
Safety Alert No. 480 
January 25, 2024 
Frontal view of stands of 6 5/8-inch pipe 
dislodged from finger row. 
Side view of dislodged stands of 6 5/8-
inch pipe. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
In October 2023, a manufacturer product improvement notification was distributed to 
inform offshore personnel about the availability of new locking bolt arrangements with 
improved functionality. The previous locking bolt design shown in Figure 2 underwent a 
redesign and enhancement to ensure improved and effective bolt locking. The 
enhanced locking bolt arrangement displayed in Figure 3 consists of a bolt, locking clip, 
and safety pin, which, when installed, prevents the bolt from unscrewing.  
 
                                 
 
   Figure 2 – Current locking bolt design.      Figure 3 – Enhanced locking bolt design. 
 
BSEE recommends that operators and their contractors, where appropriate, 
consider doing the following: 
• Inspecting the condition of all casing fingerboard beam locking bolts. 
• Reviewing fingerboard design and ensuring the best available locking 
mechanism is implemented. Contact vendor and/or manufacturer to confirm. 
• Inspecting and checking the pressure applied by air cylinders to ensure 
proper pressure is being applied to the flip over beam. 
• Ensuring all racked casing and pipe are properly secured and cannot fall out 
of the fingerboard during adverse weather. 
Figure 1 – Typical adjustable fingerboard 
with flip over locking bolt. 

 
 
• Subscribing to and reviewing all original equipment manufacturer product 
bulletins and alerts. 
• Adhering to Red Zone
1
 Management when required. 
• Reviewing the following BSEE publications related to pipe handling and 
racking systems for additional information and recommendations: 
o Safety Alert 324 – regarding four pipe racking system incidents 
o Safety Bulletin 2 and Panel Report 2017-001 – regarding a fatality 
following a fingerboard latch malfunction during pipe handling 
 
– BSEE – 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1
 A Red Zone is a designated high-risk area, where personnel must secure permission to enter. 
It is to minimize the impact of drops incidents or moving equipment on personnel. 
A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations that 
could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
 
 
Category: Pipe Handling, Personnel Safety, Lifting 