

 
Safety Alert No. 372                     Contact: Nicholas Fraiche 
December 5, 2019                      Phone: (504) 736-7631 
 
 
Improper Use of Equipment Causes Blasting Cap Misfire 
 
 
                                                Improper meter is  used to test unshielded blasting cap.  
 
On September 22, 2019, an electric line operator was injured when a “Green Detonator” 
blasting cap ignited while he performed a continuity test using a megohmmeter. The 
incident occurred at an offshore facility while preparing for tubing cutting operations.  
 
The operator performed continuity tests on a wireline shock sub tool using a 
megohmmeter then attempted to test the “Green Detonator” blasting cap with the same 
meter. The operator did not follow standard operational protocol and did not use the 
proper tool to test the detonator. In addition, the blasting cap was not placed inside a 
safety loading tube prior to testing.
 
 
American Petroleum Institute (API) Recommended Practice 67 states, “only instruments 
recommended for use when testing electrical detonators and detonator circuits are those 
specifically designed and/or qualified for checking explosives and explosives circuits. The 
test current from the meter used to perform resistance checks shall not exceed 25 
milliamperes or 10% of the no-fire rating of the detonator in the circuit, whichever is less.” 
 
 
  
SAFETY ALERT 
 
 

A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations 
that could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf.  
 
Therefore, BSEE recommends operators and contractors consider the following:  
 
•    During explosive operations, personnel must follow operating procedures and use 
the correct tools and equipment for the task. 
 
•    Ensure field personnel have completed appropriate explosive training; 
 
•    Consider a two-person sign off requirement of safe operating procedures prior to 
initiating all explosive operations; 
 
•    Discuss explosive hazards during pre-job safety meetings;  
 
•    Ensure a detailed procedure is    available for reference during an explosive 
operation;  
 
•    Label megohmmeters and other electrical testing equipment with a warning not to 
use for testing explosive caps; 
 
•    Review and update operational procedures as necessary to maintain its accuracy 
and encourage compliance; and, 
 
•    Provide regular training (both in-classroom and hands-on) on explosive usage and 
proper equipment identification and labeling.  
 
Due to the frequency of similar testing across the industry, BSEE is issuing this Safety Alert 
prior to the conclusion of an ongoing investigation. If BSEE’s investigation reveals 
additional pertinent information, another Safety Alert will be issued. 
 
--BSEE-- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 