

 
Safety Alert No. 399                             Contact: Jason Mathews 
October 7, 2020               Phone: (504) 731-1496 
 
Grating Failures Cause a Fatality and a Serious Near Miss  
 
        
                   
                                                                                        
 
                             
 
 
During a planned maintenance and construction outage on a production platform on May 
16,
 
2020, a contractor working on the casing deck inside of a hard-barricaded area 
(Figure 1) fell 30-40 feet to the deck below (Figure 2), resulting in death.  
On May 4, 2020, in a separate incident on another facility, an electrician fell through the 
grating area where repair work was being conducted. The electrician was surveying 
lighting repairs when he stepped on a section of grating that gave way beneath him 
(Figure 3). He was able to catch himself using his arms to prevent falling through to the 
plus-10 decking 40 feet below (Figure 4). Other employees in the area were able to assist 
him to safety. 
 
SAFETY ALERT 
 
 
Figure 1. Grating Failure on a casing deck that 
resulted in a fatality.      
Figure 2. View from below the Grating Failure 
that resulted in a fatality. 
 

A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations 
that could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
 
                                                                                   
             
            
 
Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators and contractors consider the 
following:  
• Review Safety Alert 353
 with your workers, discuss hazardous areas and 
encourage feedback to ensure understanding;  
• Inspect your facility to confirm the integrity of decks, grating, and structural and 
support beams;  
•    Ensure that any area of marginal or suspect strength is identified, clearly marked, 
and appropriately barricaded. Take measures to immediately repair, replace or 
mitigate the identified areas, and inform workers of these zones; 
• Ensure all personnel within areas of marginal or suspect strength follow all facility-
level fall protection practices in job planning and conducting operations; and, 
• Ensure that Job Safety Analysis is conducted and reviewed prior to the start of 
operation. 
--BSEE-- 
Figure 3. View of grating failure on a facility that 
resulted in a serious near miss.      
Figure 4. View of grating from plus-10 on a facility 
that resulted in a serious near miss.     
 