

 
                               
                                           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
   
  
  
 
    
                            
   
SAFETYALERT 
Safety Alert No. 410      Contact: Tony Richardson 
February 8, 2021    Phone: (571)-353-4122 
 Damaged Electric Cord Results in Arc Flash  
A worker observed an arc flash while performing construction activities that required 
additional lighting in the work area. Construction personnel ran an extension cord from a 
welding machine to portable lights that were needed in a different location, but when the 
machine was turned on, the electrical welding lead cable
1
 arced and glowed. A nearby 
worker immediately pulled the lead cable away from a self-retracting lanyard (SRL) 
cable
2
, breaking the SRL cable. No fire occurred and no personnel were injured.   
Upon immediate investigation, it was discovered that the rubber protective coating on the 
electrical welding lead cable was worn down by the continuous movement of steel SRL 
cable rubbing against it, which resulted in exposed welding lead cable wires. When the 
welding machine was turned on, the steel cable on the SRL made metal-to-metal contact 
with the welding lead cable wires and triggered the arc flash. This caused damage to both 
the welding lead cable and SRL cable.  
A frayed SRL cable that made contact with metal grading. 
The SRL cable rubbed and wore 
down the outer coating of the 
welding lead when the cable 
moved up and down through a 
deck penetration hole. 
When the welding machine was 
turned on, the exposed lead 
arced on the SRL cable and 
broke the cable at the arc point. 
1 
Electrical welding lead cable is a specially designed metal rod for use in electric arc-welding machines to power an 
electrode that conducts a charge. The charge carried by the electrode is needed to produce an electric arc—the heat 
source—between the electrode and the metals, or other materials, being welded. 
2 
A self-retracting lanyard (SRL) is a vertical lifeline that is used as part of a complete fall arrest system. The lifeline, 
much like the seat and shoulder belt in a car, pulls out and retracts easily. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators and contractors consider the following: 
 Confirm proper separation of electrical energy sources, such as electrical cords and 
welding leads, from rigging, fall arrest equipment or any other identified equipment 
on a work site that could cause physical damage; 
 Ensure that welding leads and SRL cables are separated during hot work activities 
and avoid putting them through the same deck penetration plate; 
 Inspect welding leads and SRL cable before use to ensure they are in good working 
condition; 
 Ensure safe routing of electrical equipment cords, cables, etc., to prevent abrasion 
and abnormal wear of their protective sheathes/coatings; 
 Before work begins, check the final worksite to ensure all safety provisions/systems 
are in place and all hazards are controlled and risks are reduced to as low as 
reasonably possible; and,  
 Ensure all Permit to Work and Job Safety Analysis documents and reviews include 
inspection and assessment of the electrical hazards prior to the start of a job. 
--BSEE-- 
A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations 
that could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
Category: Arc Flash 