

Safety Alert No. 340                                                     Contact: Darron Miller 
23 August 2018                                                      Phone: (337) 437-4632 
Caisson Well Surface Safety Valve Actuator Explodes 
In January 2018, an explosion occurred on an offshore production caisson in the 
Gulf of Mexico. As a satellite well was being brought online in extremely cold 
weather, the operator could not get instrument gas to the well on the caisson in 
order to open a surface safety valve (SSV) because of a frozen supply gas line. As a 
result, the operator stated that he installed a 3/8-inch stainless steel tubing jumper 
from a ½-inch needle valve on the top of the well tree (downstream of the closed 
SSV) to the actuator.  
                              
                    Bottom of SSV Actuator                                                         Top Diaphragm Case 
      
Capped off fitting in place of pressure relief device                                 Damaged Grating 
The latest, recorded, shut-in tubing pressure (SITP) on the well was 2,960 pounds 
per square inch (psi). The pressure indicated on the tree, prior to opening the SSV, 
was 163 psi. After the operator opened the needle valve, without the use of any type 
of regulator to step down the upstream pressure, the actuator experienced an 
SAFETY ALERT 

A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas 
industry of the circumstances surrounding an accident or near miss. It also 
contains recommendations that should help prevent the recurrence of such 
an incident on the Outer Continental Shelf.
overpressure. Therefore, the explosion occurred when the SSV opened upon 
actuator pressurization, which rapidly introduced 2,276 psi (recorded trend pressure) 
of non-regulated well gas through the tubing jumper and into the SSV actuator, 
which was designed for a maximum operating pressure of 150 psi. The overpressure 
caused the fastener bolts to fail, allowing explosive separation of the diaphragm 
case, top shaft, and diaphragm/diaphragm retainer plate from the lower diaphragm 
case. The operator reported that no injuries or pollution had occurred; however, 
nearby grating was damaged along with the SSV. 
Although the diaphragm actuator design included a ½-inch pressure relief device 
installed and sized for instrument gas regulator failure, it had been 
removed/replaced with a capped-off tubing fitting at some prior point in time.  
The lease operator found that their operating procedures for this caisson did not 
cover the start-up of the well without the use of the fuel gas system. They also found 
that the job safety analysis (JSA) did not cover the steps in the actual process used 
to bring the platform on-line. Additionally, the lease operator’s procedures did not 
incorporate the practice of running a jumper line from the top of the tree to the 
actuator, and the operator was unaware of the cause and effects that could occur by 
doing such. Furthermore, the operator appeared unaware that the equipment had 
been altered from the original design. 
Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators consider the following: 
· Do not alter equipment from original design without fully understanding potential 
consequences. 
· Institute operating procedures that account for start-up during all potential 
conditions. 
· Initiate stop work for any deviation from safe operations.  
· Follow Management of Change procedures when confronted with a situation for 
which there is no published Operating Procedure. 
· Fully understand cause and effects during all operations. 
· Safely supply instrument and fuel gas where applicable. 