

 
Safety Alert No. 365                          Contact: Jason Mathews 
September 13, 2019                      Phone:    (504) 731-1496 
 
 
BSEE Identified Grating and Open Hole Hazards  
During Risk Based Inspections 
 
 
 
A BSEE inspector conducts a grating and open hole hazards inspection. 
 
BSEE inspected 42 facilities in the Gulf of Mexico Region over a multiday period in July 
2019 due to recent incidents associated with grating and open holes on offshore oil and 
natural gas facilities. This risk-based inspection was conducted to help reduce the 
likelihood of future grating and open hole incidents on the U.S. Outer Continental Shelf.  
 
At the completion of the inspections, BSEE reviewed the results and conducted additional 
reviews of  Safety and Environmental Management System specific items (e.g., standard 
operating procedures, emergency drills and hazard communication). As a result of the 
risk-based inspection, BSEE issued incidents of noncompliance (INCs) associated with 
workplace safety conditions to 22 of the 42 inspected facilities (52%). The following items 
are a summary of BSEE’s findings related to grating and open hole issues and associated 
factors: 
  
•    The overwhelming majority of the facility orientations did not address known 
hazards at the facility associated with grating and open holes;  
SAFETY ALERT 
 
 

• The majority of the 42 inspected facilities did not have standard operating 
procedures for opening or removing hatch covers. Additionally, BSEE identified 
multiple well hatch covers that were not labeled, labeled incorrectly, or not secured 
to prevent personnel from accessing the covers inadvertently;  
• The majority of the inspected facilities had access to hard barricades; however, 
inspection teams found temporary barricades made of caution tape, ratchet straps 
and cable. Some hard barricades were not properly secured. The temporary 
barricades did not comply with facility open hole policies; 
• Outside of Level I inspections, the majority of operators that were part of the Risk 
Based Inspection did not have implemented grating inspection programs 
conducted by a qualified/certified inspector that focused on integrity, fasteners, and 
supporting structural members;  
• Work orders related to grating and open hole issues were being generated at the 
facility level; however, for the majority of the work orders there was no process to 
prioritize the work and some work orders were open for over 12 months.  
• The majority of inspected facilities did not provide training on critical, injury-related 
incident response equipment, such as stokes litters. Inspectors also found 
unusable emergency equipment;  
• Check-in programs had inconsistent or undocumented periodic personnel 
communication. Further, BSEE did not identify any consistent technology or 
practice in place to track, or locate, personnel who fall from the platform into the 
water;   
• Stop Work Authority (SWA) and Ultimate Work Authority (UWA) were implemented 
at every facility inspected; however, there is an opportunity for improvement by 
ensuring that (1) personnel are aware of that fact that they have no fear of reprisal 
when utilizing SWA and (2) the person with UWA is clearly identified during 
orientation and on signs at the facility; and 
• Some “Reporting Unsafe Work Condition” signs did not conform with 
recommendations provided in BSEE Safety Alert 357. 
 
Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators consider the following: 
 
• Review facility orientation policy and ensure all potential grating and open hole  
hazards are communicated to personnel boarding the facility; 
• Review the inventory of well hatch covers and develop standard operating 
procedures for opening, removing, identifying and securing hatches; 
• Review the open hole policy and ensure that, at a minimum, barricades (1) have a 
middle and top rail; (2) are at least 42-inches in height; and (3) are capable of 
withstanding a load of 200 pounds;  
 
 

A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations 
that could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
 
• Conduct an inventory of hard barricades available at facilities. If hard barricades 
are not available, procedures should be developed and implemented that (1) 
require that an open hole attendant is positioned at open holes, (2) communicate 
known open hole/grating risks   to facility personnel, and (3) verify that any 
temporary barricades will prevent the flow of personnel into a hazardous area until 
a hard barricade is available; 
• Develop a regular frequency of operator inspections focused on the integrity of 
decks, grating, and structural and support beams on your facility. If an area of 
marginal or suspect strength is identified, ensure that it is clearly marked, 
appropriate mitigation actions are taken, and employees are informed of those 
zones; 
• Evaluate open work orders associated with grating and prioritize those that are 
critical to the safety of offshore personnel. If work orders cannot be addressed in 
the near future due to construction crew or vessel availability, operators should 
ensure the area of concern is appropriately barricaded; 
• Review BSEE Safety Bulletin No. 18, published on July 8, 2019, which discusses 
hoisting issues. Also, develop and implement an inspection protocol for emergency 
response and control measures equipment. 
• Develop and implement check-in    procedures for employees, contractors and 
subcontractors working alone on offshore facilities. Additionally, evaluate 
technologies that can aid in the detection and location of people in distress. 
• Review BSEE Safety Alert No. 357, published on July 1, 2019, which  describes 
proper posting of signage for employees wishing to report unsafe work conditions 
to BSEE; 
• Consider informing offshore personnel of the BSEE!Safe Initiative to ensure 
offshore workers are informed when BSEE releases safety information; and 
• Consider adding a “no fear” clause regarding Stop Work Authority to Job Safety 
Analysis forms and ensure that every orientation identifies the person with Ultimate 
Work Authority. 
 
 
 
--BSEE-- 
 