

A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations 
that could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf.  
 
                                                         Category: Spill/Pollution 
 
 
Safety Alert No. 412                    Contact: Andrew Gros 
February 24, 2021             Phone: (504) 736-3221 
 
 
Failure to Follow Procedures Result in Pollution 
Incidents 
 
On July 9, 2020, a pollution incident occurred during well workover operations. A BSEE 
investigation found that a total of 57 barrels of synthetic oil base for drilling fluids   spilled 
into the Gulf of Mexico (GOM) during riser displacement. The standpipe gate valve and 
bleed-off valve were left in the open position during the pump operation. The valves’ 
status was considered to be normally closed by personnel and assumed to be in the 
closed position. Personnel did not physically check these valves during line-up verification 
prior to startup.  
 
On November 16, 2020, a pollution incident occurred during fluid transfer operations. 
After abandonment operations, personnel cleaned the mud pits and left the reserve pit, 
desander, desilter, and degasser valves in the open position. After tour change, and 
without checking valve status, the crew started to transfer Synthetic Based Mud (SBM) 
from an offshore Supply Vessel to the mud pits. Approximately 458 barrels of SBM 
inadvertently discharged into the GOM due to the open valves. This incident is currently 
under investigation, but preliminary information shows operations procedures were not 
followed. 
 
Therefore, the BSEE recommends that operators and contractors:  
 
    Ensure the flow path of the fluid transfer systems   are thoroughly understood by 
personnel when conducting pipe/valve verification. 
    Physically label fluid transfer system valves to    help identify if they are in the correct 
position prior to startup.  
    Ensure the proper procedures are followed, while including duties and 
responsibilities of the personnel involved. 
    Follow Lock Out/Tag Out (LOTO) policy to establish physical barriers for overboard 
specific mud system components. 
    Review Safety Alert 224  and  Safety Alert 292
  that also discussed similar 
incidents. 
 
SAFETY ALERT 
 
 

A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations 
that could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf.  
 
--BSEE-- 