

Safety Alert No. 417                                                 Contact: David Nedorostek 
March 25, 2021                                                              Phone: 703-787-1029 
Inadequate Operation of Circuit Breakers 
An incident took place onboard a production facility where a critical circuit breaker was 
disengaged. During an annual inspection, a maintenance worker was instructed to 
check the compressor #2 breaker's status in the Motor Control Center (MCC) building. 
In reviewing the #2 compressor breaker status, the individual pressed the switchboard 
command buttons that disengage the circuit breaker that supplies power to the 
compressor.  This action resulted in the main circuit breaker losing power, causing the 
Public /General and Emergency Alarms activation. This incident caused no injuries or 
equipment damage but resulted in a significant loss in facility downtime and project 
delays. 
Observations/Analysis: 
· The individual went beyond checking the status and disengaged the breaker. 
· Labels explaining the function of the breaker command buttons (i.e., open/reset) on 
the switchboard were not self-explanatory and were free to interpretation. 
· The indicator lights on the outside of the cabinet showed "yellowish-brown" (see 
picture) as the normal operating condition. The indicator lights' position could have 
been potentially confusing due to the lack of a policy/procedure addressing the color 
scheme for the breaker's operation status. 
· There was no procedure or work instruction to control entry to the MCC building or 
operation of the breakers. 
Figure 1 - Compressor #2 breaker Figure 2 -  Switchboard open/reset command 
buttons 

· Changes to the electrical system were not addressed/documented in maintenance 
procedures or included on the equipment drawings. 
· The operator did not follow the company's management of change procedures which 
identify equipment alterations. 
· Indications are the job safety analysis (JSA)
[1]
did not reflect the switchboard's 
labeling/ breaker command buttons. 
BSEE recommends that operators and contractors, for those individuals 
working in or around the MCC building, consider ensuring: 
                                                         
· Personnel (electrical or general) are trained to recognize and understand the 
equipment's operation within the MCC building and on the switchboards. 
· Those working on electrical equipment and on unrelated tasks (e.g., maintenance), 
but in the proximity to electrical equipment, are trained on electrical safety, and the 
training is documented. 
· Necessary/appropriate personnel are knowledgeable and familiar with the meaning 
of various indicator lights on electrical equipment. 
· Electrical maintenance policies/ procedures are current, dated, and reflect all 
changes made to the electrical systems. 
· Instruction/operation manuals and documentation are current, available, and 
pertinent (e.g., circuit breaker diagrams) and is clearly posted on circuit breaker 
cabinets. 
· All electrical one-line diagrams are 30 CFR 250.842 compliant and available to 
personnel working on electrical equipment. 
· All personnel who have access to the MCC building (e.g., maintenance) are familiar 
with the electrical panels. 
· An in-depth pre-job safety meeting involving working in, or in the vicinity of, the MCC 
is conducted and documented, and, if determined appropriate, a field review of the 
worksite should be included. 
· Installation of protective hinged coverings to prevent accidental activation of critical 
electrical command buttons. 
[1]
 Job Safety Analysis (JSA) is a safety tool that can be used to define, and control hazards associated with a certain 
process, job, or procedure. It is a systematic examination and documentation of every task within each job to 
identify health and safety hazards, and the steps to control each task. 
Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the circumstances 
surrounding an accident or near miss. It also contains recommendations that should help prevent the 
recurrence of such an incident on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
Categories: Electrical 