Safety Alert No. 167 - Retrieval of Back-Pressure Valve Results in Lo... http://www.gomr.boemre.gov/homepg/offshore/safety/safealt/SA_167... 
U.S. Department of the Interior
 
Minerals Management Service
 
Gulf of Mexico OCS Region
 
Notice No. 167 
June 17, 1996 
Retrieval of Back-Pressure Valve Results 
in Loss of Well Control 
In the process of retrieving a back-pressure valve during a workover operation, a loss of well control occurred 
as pressure was released from the wellbore. The release of pressure expelled fluids from the wellbore and also 
caused the rotary bushing inserts to be blown onto the drill floor. The accident resulted in one fatality and two 
injuries. 
A subsequent inspection of the back-pressure valve found that the relief groove, which is designed to detect 
pressure below the valve and allow communication between the wellbore and the tubing hanger, was full of 
debris. The inspection also revealed that the poppet, which forms the pressure seal between the wellbore and 
the tubing hanger, was free to move. Subsequent testing of the surface-controlled subsurface safety valve 
indicated a minor leakage rate. 
Therefore, from this information the following are recommended: 
1. Lessees, drilling contractors, and all appropriate service personnel should ensure that: 
a. A well is killed before initiating the installation and removal of a back-pressure valve. 
b. All equipment is functioning properly before initiating installation of a back-pressure valve. 
c.   The rotary bushings inserts are locked down when inserted in the rotary table. 
2. Lessees, drilling contractors, and all appropriate service personnel should attempt to determine if pressure is 
trapped below a back-pressure valve prior to initiating the removal of the valve. 
MMS is the Federal Agency that manages the Nation's natural gas, oil and other mineral resources on the Outer 
Continental Shelf, and collects, accounts for, and disburses about $4 billion yearly in revenues from mineral 
leases on Federal and Indian lands. 
-MMS-GOMR­
http://www.gomr.mms.gov/ 
1 of 1 2/21/2012 4:10 PM