

 
 
 
 
 
MMS 
U.S. Department of the Interior 
Minerals Management Service 
 Gulf of Mexico OCS Region
 Safety 
Alert 
Safety Alert No. 272 	Contact:  Jason Mathews 
12 November 2008 	(203) 891-7770 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Corroded Ring Gasket Causes Loss of Well Control 
Recently, contract personnel were performing routine scaling operations in an attempt to repair a 
leaking  Surface  Controlled  Subsurface  Safety  Valve  (SCSSV).  After  several  unsuccessful  
attempts to remove the scale with a wireline unit, the operator decided to perform an acid job to 
reduce the amount of scale around the SCSSV. The following day, after the acid job, the operator 
reentered the well to perform more scraping. A seal ring on the bottom flange below the master 
valve  began  to  leak  and  dry  gas  was  released  into  the  atmosphere.  Since  the  SCSSV  was  not  
operable  and  the  leak  was  below  the  master  valve,  the  operator  was  not  able  to  prevent  the  
escape of natural gas. The platform was evacuated shortly after the loss of well control without 
injury. 
A Minerals Management Service (MMS) investigation concluded that the causes of the incident 
were a severely corroded ring gasket, the performance of an acid job which possibly accelerated 
the failure of the ring gasket, and a leaking SCSSV. 
Therefore, the MMS recommends the following: 
•	 Lessees  and  designated  operators  should  review  their  policies  regarding  the  performing  
of acid operations within a well especially if an SCSSV is not functioning properly. 
•	 Lessees and designated operators should review their platform specific emergency plans 
to reduce further injuries or accidents when an incident occurs. 
•	 Lessees and designated operators should be able to trace the history of ring gaskets in the 
field  regardless  of  previous  ownership,  and/or  determine  the  condition  of  said  ring  
gaskets prior to the performance of future operations. 
--MMS--GOMR--
www.gomr.mms.gov 