

 
Safety Alert No. 2020-389                         Contact: Jason Mathews 
15 June 2020                                     Phone: (504) 731-1496 
 
 
Fatality Caused By Freefalling Pipe Underscores the Need to Adhere 
to Safety and Environmental Management Systems & 
Safe Work Practices 
 
A fatal incident occurred during construction operations on a Gulf of Mexico facility when a 
contractor was using ½-inch manila rope to lower a 6-inch diameter pipe cut 4 ft. long over 30 feet 
onto the +10 deck below. During the descent, the rope parted causing the pipe to free fall. At the 
same time, a contractor on the +10 deck was maneuvering in the landing zone. The pipe struck the 
contractor in the head, hit the +10 deck then went overboard into the Gulf of Mexico. Despite 
wearing a hard hat,  the contractor suffered a fatal injury.  
A subsequent investigation revealed that contractors hired by the operator started a firewater 
piping system demobilization the day before the fatality. The job safety analysis (JSA) failed to 
identify specific task steps and potential hazards specific to the job task. Scaffolding erected for 
the construction operation was not built per policy and procedure and known hazards were not 
discussed in pre-job safety meeting.  
During the demobilization, two contractors on scaffolding were cutting the firewater piping into 
pieces. On both the morning the incident occurred and the day before,  contractors allowed several 
pieces of pipe to fall over 30 feet from scaffolding and into the Gulf of Mexico. At no time did the 
contractors use s top work authority (SWA) to determine the imminent risk or danger. On the 
morning of the fatality, the fallen pipe hazard was not mentioned or identified as a hazard in the 
pre-job safety meeting.  
The operator representative assigned as the facility person in charge and ultimate work authority 
was not familiar with all    the responsibilities and obligations required for the position. The 
contractor representative assigned to lead the construction operation did not review all the 
operator’s policies and procedures and allowed construction operations to proceed without proper 
permits. The investigation determined that neither supervisor maintained Safety and 
Environmental Management Systems (SEMS) oversight nor implemented effective safe work 
practices (SWP). 
Some contractor personnel could not read English. BSEE’s Investigation Team determined that 
these employees were unable to read copies of the operators SWP manual, employee & non-
employee orientation checklist or job specific JSAs. BSEE is not suggesting that these personnel 
did not understand safety, but it would be difficult for anyone to understand the information on the 
documents they are required to initial/sign when they cannot read the specific language used in the 
documents. 
 
SAFETY ALERT 
 
 

A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations 
that could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
 
 
The purpose of a SEMS is to enhance the safety of operations by reducing the frequency and 
severity of incidents. A SEMS plan and SWP are ineffective if not enforced by those responsible 
for leading personnel or supervising operations on the OCS. It is imperative that operators 
understand that it is their responsibility to ensure compliance with, and adherence to, SEMS and 
SWP.    
 
Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators consider the following: 
 
 
• Ensure personnel are familiar with their job descriptions and have the knowledge 
and training to accomplish the duties assigned per CFR 250.1913 (d).  
• Add fire watch responsibilities per 30 CFR 250.113(2) to Hot Work Permits. 
• Provide adequate training for employees responsible for leading personnel and 
supervising operations on offshore facilities.  
• Communicate Safe Work Practices and Safety and Environmental Management 
Systems and ensure full compliance during operations. 
• Have policies for scaffolding operations on facilities. 
• Re-emphasize each person’s obligation to use SWA when a hazardous situation 
appears imminent or an unsafe condition or act is observed that could affect the 
safety of personnel and/or the environment. 
• Review the marine trash and debris video produced by BSEE 
(https://bit.ly/2vMHlhx
) and re-emphasize that it is an employee’s obligation to 
report items that fall into the marine environment. 
• Provide safety documents in languages that can be understood by the workers on 
your facilities. 