

Contact: bseepublicaffairs@bsee.gov 
Phone: (800) 200-4853 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
Toppled Hydraulic Workover Unit Results in Fatality 
 
 
Hydraulic Workover Unit Before(left) and After (right) Fatal Incident 
Recently, a hydraulic workover unit (HWU) toppled while being erected on a caisson 
located in 35-feet of water in the Gulf of Mexico, resulting in a contractor employee 
falling into the water. The HWU, consisting of a blowout preventer (BOP) and pipe 
jack assembly weighing approximately 120,000 lbs., was installed on the wellhead 
and attached to a 20-inch structural casing. Preliminary observations indicate a 
break in the casing at the production tree or just below the drive pipe which resulted 
in the HWU and tree falling over. At the time of the toppling, one contractor 
employee was elevated on the HWU and tied off with a safety harness for fall 
protection but fell into the water with part of the HWU. 
 
The exact cause(s) of the incident is under investigation. Because the factors 
involved in this incident potentially are common to non-rig   well interventions in the 
Gulf of Mexico, BSEE recommends all operators and well-operation contractors 
review their facilities’ fall protection procedures, safe work practices, results of the 
  
 
Safety Alert No. 439 
April 25, 2022  
SAFETY ALERT 
 
 

latest Level I surveys, and load capacities of wells and platforms before installing 
equipment.  
 
While this is a preliminary safety alert, BSEE recommends that operators and 
contractors consider the following: 
 
• Increasing awareness of the dangers inherent in rigging up HWU, or non-rig 
units, with work environments that make it difficult to tie-off when fall 
protection is used. 
• Reviewing the fall protection design and determining whether quick release of 
emergency cut-away mechanisms may be used without compromising overall 
safety or creating new risk. 
• Ensuring a reliable means of support exists whenever a HWU, or non-rig unit, 
is being unhooked from the crane. 
• Ensuring your facility and connection points can support the installed 
equipment and the max pull capacity available during workover operations. 
• Reviewing the planning process to ensure a detailed review if unique or 
unusual operations are contemplated. And if incorporated, including the new 
processes as part of the agenda for safety meetings and training. 
• Ensuring onsite supervision is fully qualified for the planned operations.  
• Ensuring the details of all plans are fully communicated and understood. 
• Placing special emphasis on the Job Safety Analysis process and shift hand-
off meetings to ensure that all personnel and supervisors are involved in the 
process. 
• Considering seasonal weather patterns when installing means of support for 
HWU or non-rig units. 
• If structural damage is found in Level I, II, or III surveys, completing a 
structural analysis and performing any repairs before connecting equipment 
such as BOPs, workover, and snubbing, coil tubing units, etc. 
• Reviewing Panel Report 2007-045 and Safety Alerts 310 and 251. 
• Offering training refreshers for all personnel involved in this type of operation 
and including this incident as a study case to promote discussion and 
understanding of the risks. 
 
 
 
 
A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations that 
could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
 
 
Category: Component Failures, General  