

 
 
Contact: bseepublicaffairs@bsee.gov 
Phone: (800) 200-4853 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 Hazardous Helideck Conditions Result in Near Miss Incident 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A recent near miss is among a series of safety incidents involving unsafe helideck 
conditions and points to an ongoing trend of poor adherence to established procedures. 
This safety alert aims to prevent aviation mishaps due to complacency by highlighting 
negative behaviors surrounding procedures and emphasizing the need for continuous 
vigilance and adhering to safety protocols. 
The following incident serves as a precautionary example of potential hazards 
associated with helideck operations and conditions.    
Loose Helideck Skirting with Damaged Support Structure (Jan. 30, 2024): 
After receiving clearance for landing at an offshore helideck, the aircrew noticed upon 
landing that a section of the helideck’s safety skirting was not properly secured to the 
support structure and was blowing upward and downward due to the helicopter’s rotor 
downwash. This created an imminent hazard to safe helicopter operations with 
potentially catastrophic results (Figures 1 and 2). 
 
  
 
Safety Alert No. 481 
Feb.    14, 2024 
Figure 1. Damaged helideck skirting. 
 
Figure 2. Damaged skirting substructure. 
 

 
 
BSEE recommends that operators and their contractors, where appropriate, 
consider doing the following:  
 
• Ensuring personnel are aware of and understand related policies and procedures 
to prevent incidents during helideck operations. This includes verifying the 
condition of the helideck structure and the potential impacts of simultaneous 
operations prior to giving clearance to land or takeoff. 
 
• Ensuring proper notifications are made for out-of-service helidecks to the 
appropriate BSEE District Office and Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) for 
Notice to Air Mission (NOTAM). 
 
• Ensuring proper markings to identify out-of-service helidecks are clearly visible 
from the air. 
 
• Ensuring safety-critical operations are well planned with the proper controls in 
place for flawless execution. 
 
• Monitoring operations for signs of weakness or noncompliance, implementing 
specific actions to correct any identified issues. 
 
• Developing and implementing facility-specific helicopter operations procedures to 
eliminate uncertainties and enhance safety protocols. 
 
• Ensuring proper helideck management principles for pre-arrival briefings and 
toolbox meetings.  
 
Additionally, BSEE reminds industry to review the following helpful information to 
minimize risks to passengers, helideck crews, and workers involved in offshore 
helideck operations: 
• HSAC RP 163
 Inspection, Maintenance and Operations of Offshore Helidecks. 
• HSAC RP 165 Air Operator Guidelines for Offshore Helicopter Operations – 1
st
 
Edition. 
• BSEE Safety Alert No. 322 / Helideck Obstructions and Compounding Procedural 
Errors Contribute to Five Near Misses on OCS. 
• BSEE Safety Alert No.413 / Hazards Identified in Level I Surveys not 
Communicated to Affected Personnel. 
• BSEE Safety Alert No. 479 / Lack of Adherence to Helideck Safety Procedures 
Results in Series of Near Miss Incidents for additional information. 

 
 
• BSEE Notice to Lessees (NTL), NTL-2021-N03/Helideck Closures and Markings. 
• 30 CFR 250.890 –    Records. (c) You must submit to the appropriate district 
manager a contact list for all facilities at least annually or when contact 
information is revised. The contact list must include: (6) Facility helideck rating 
and size. 
 
– BSEE – 
A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the circumstances 
surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations that could assist avoiding potential 
incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
 
 
Category: Aviation 