

Safety Alert No. 379                             Contact: Stephen Harris 
February 28, 2020                            Phone: (504) 736-3249 
Broken Compressor Heat Exchanger Causes Fire 
                                                            
In November 2019, a fire occurred on an offshore production platform in the Gulf of 
Mexico when tubing in a third stage compressor heat exchanger broke away from its 
manifold block, releasing gas that ignited at the compressor’s engine exhaust. The 
compressor engine exhaust was located above the heat exchanger where gas could rise 
toward the exhaust pipe. Personnel successfully extinguished the fire within minutes. 
BSEE’s investigation team concluded the operator’s inspection and maintenance of the 
heat exchanger was inadequate to prevent loss of integrity thereby allowing a gas leak to 
occur. Additionally, the compressor engine exhaust was located above the heat 
exchanger creating an ignition source. Although the muffler was wrapped with an 
insulation blanket, the final exhaust pipe was exposed and within the classified area 
created by the gas tubes within the heat exchangers. 
A similar incident occurred in October 2017 when a tube in a third stage compressor heat 
exchanger ruptured, also causing a fire. Locating and fixing small leaks can reduce the 
possibility of heat exchanger tubes experiencing full disconnects or ruptures. 
Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators and contractors consider the 
following: 
· Establish increased oversight practices for rolled joints on tubing at heat exchanger 
manifold blocks due to the higher probability of leakage; 
SAFETY ALERT 
Broken heat exchanger pipe 
Ruptured heat exchanger pipe 
Compressor engine exhaust 

A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations 
that could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf.
· Consider using an ultrasonic leak detector or infrared camera, or conducting 
hydrotesting to inspect the condition of heat exchanger pipes rather than by visual 
inspection alone; and, 
· Ensure engine exhaust is routed to an unclassified area, as recommended by API 
Recommended Practice 14F, to prevent a possible ignition source for the heat 
exchanger. 
--BSEE-- 