

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MMS 
U.S. Department of the Interior 
Minerals Management Service 
 Gulf of Mexico OCS Region
 Safety 
Alert 
Safety Alert No. 284 Contact:  Glynn T. Breaux 
15 December 2009 (504) 736-2560 
Diverter Flow Event 
Recently a semi-submersible rig’s completion operation resulted in a diverter flow event when formation 
gas that was most likely trapped under the Blowout Preventer Upper Annular (BOPUA) rapidly expanded 
as it entered the riser.  The well had been perforated, reverse circulated and the work string packer 
unseated with the well monitored in a static condition.  Within minutes of rigging down surface lines a 10 
bbl trip tank gain was observed.  Approximately half of the riser’s 800 bbl capacity was discharged 
through both 12-inch diverter lines within 20 minutes of the BOPUA closure.  Rig personnel described 
the diverter flow noise and vibration as increasing to a “deafening roar.”  A hot tapping operation was 
performed to relieve 3,000 psi on the pressure-locked TIW Valve.  Bullheading and riser booster 
operations were then utilized to kill the well while preventing riser collapse.   
Although the MMS investigation identified several opportunities for formation gas influx/migration in the 
wellbore, no clear and specific cause could be identified for the gas bubble to have traveled into the riser 
prior to the first surface observed trip tank gain and closure of the subsea BOP.  Possible causes and 
possible contributing causes that may have prompted the event include: 
Possible Causes 
(1)  Unintentional momentary opening of the packer’s bypass valve and/or sealing elements 
subsequent to perforating:  The reverse shock wave created by 86 feet of 7 inch hollow carrier 
perforating guns could have been great enough to allow communication to the annulus above the 
packer from momentary opening of the packer’s bypass valve and/or relaxation of the packer’s 
sealing elements. 
(2)  Intentional elimination of the second reverse circulation step subsequent to unseating the packer: 
The completion’s procedure proposed a second reverse circulation step subsequent to unseating 
the packer in order to remove any influx that was trapped under the packer following the 
perforating operation.  When the well went on vacuum after perforating, in addition to 
determining that the well was static subsequent to opening the packer’s bypass valve and 
unseating the packer, the operator eliminated the second reverse circulation operation.  
Elimination of this step could have complicated the well kill operation through possible 
additional gas influx/migration. 

 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Possible Contributing Causes 
(1)  Lack of a high-viscosity pill contingency prior to perforating:  The open-hole zone being 
perforated was drilled with approximately 230 bbl loss of synthetic base mud.  Lost circulation 
material sweeps were necessary during open-hole drilling of the zone in order to control mud 
loss.  Completion fluid loss was experienced subsequent to perforating when the well went on 
vacuum, thus allowing for the possibility of formation gas/completion fluid swap-out as a result 
of the decrease in hydrostatic head.  
(2)  Pit monitoring difficulty as a result of the Driller’s Screen’s Log scale range:	 The wide Pit-
Volume-Totalizer (PVT) scale range utilized on the Driller’s screen (-10 to +600 barrels) was of a 
magnitude that made it difficult to detect subtle surface fluid system gains/losses.   
(3)  Lack of a consistently “closed” surface fluid system and undocumented trip tank piping 
arrangement: Surface system fluid monitoring became confusing as a result of the lack of a 
consistently “closed” surface fluid system resulting from fluid being continuously moved 
throughout the system (to a filter tank, cementing tank, filling/draining surface lines, general 
semi-submersible motion, etc.).  Also, there was no documentation on how the surface fluid 
system piping was arranged during the different phases of the operation to assist the crew in being 
aware of flow direction. 
Based on the investigation findings, MMS recommends that Operators and/or Lessees: 
Spot a high-viscosity completion brine pill utilizing bridging agents across the proposed  
completion zones that experience open-hole drilling fluid losses.  
Monitor work string and annular pressures closely for any anomalies, in order to isolate any 
possible work string-to-annular communication prior to proceeding with the proposed operation.  
When testing the work string packer, the work string might remain open in order to detect fluid 
from any work string leak(s).  This arrangement might also allow the test pressure to bleed off, 
thereby resulting in a more easily identified pressure decline.   
Sweep the subsea BOP on subsea wells when formation fluids are expected or known to have 
entered the wellbore and/or when the subsea BOP has been activated for any purpose other than 
testing.  Sweeping is usually followed by circulating through the gas buster upon opening the 
subsea BOP to remove any remaining formation fluid (especially gas) trapped in the subsea BOP 
“dead space” cavity. 
Consider a second reverse circulation or bullheading after unseating the work string packer 
subsequent to perforating in order to control any formation fluid influx below the packer.   
Give special attention to the down-hole perforating forces and the possibility of these forces 
opening a packer’s bypass valve and/or relaxing the sealing elements to allow formation fluids 
into the annulus above the packer. 
Maintain the surface fluid system as “closed” as possible, since fluid being moved throughout the 
surface system (to other equipment tanks, filling/draining surface lines, general semi-submersible 
rig movement, etc.) makes subtle trip tank/pit gains/losses more difficult to accurately monitor.  
Also, document the surface fluid system piping arrangement during the different phases of the 
operation to assist rig personnel in being cognizant of the flow path in order to more accurately 
analyze well flow data while possibly providing more efficient well kill procedures. 
Ensure that the scale range used on the Driller’s P-V-T screen is of a magnitude that can be used 
to readily observe subtle surface fluid system gains/losses.     
--MMS--GOMR--
www.gomr.mms.gov 