Safety Alert No. 174 - Accumulation of Gas in Living Quarters Result... http://www.gomr.boemre.gov/homepg/offshore/safety/safealt/sa_174
U.S.    Department of the Interior  
Minerals Management Service  
Gulf of Mexico OCS Region  
Notice No. 174 
November 26, 1997 
CONTACT: Chuck Schoennagel, Jr. 
(504) 736-2923 
Accumulation of Gas in Living Quarters 
Results in Explosion, Fire, and Injuries 
Three personnel were severely burned while a well was being unloaded through the low-pressure vent scrubber 
(LPVS) to the platform vent system. After they had rerouted the well flow from the test separator to the LPVS 
for unloading, the three workers proceeded to the living quarters. While they were in the living quarters the 25% 
Lower Explosive Limit (LEL) gas alarm sounded and, within seconds, an explosion and fire occurred. Emergency 
shutdown (ESD) stations were activated to shut in the platform as the employees escaped to the lower decks. 
The living quarters, heliport, and all communication equipment were destroyed. The employees were stranded 
on the platform from late evening until a crew-change helicopter arrived the next morning. 
It should be noted that the 25% LEL gas alarm had sounded during prior unloadings of the well. In addition, the 
automatic liquid dump valve was out of service, the manual liquid dump valve was open, and the pressure relief 
line was blind flanged from a previous PSE rupture on the LPVS. With the manual liquid dump valve open, gas 
blowby to the sump was very probable. Deck drain piping was tied into the liquid dump line piping from the LPVS 
before entering the sump. A P-trap was the only protection for preventing gas migration to deck drain piping. 
The living quarters building was positioned over deck drains with many openings in the building through which 
gas could migrate. 
Therefore, from this information, the following are recommended: 
1.  When gas sensor heads detect a 25% LEL in the living quarters, lessees and operators should 
consider shutting down operations until they establish the reason for the alarm by locating and eliminating the 
source of the gas or by identifying and correcting any problem with the gas detection system. 
2.  Lessees and operators should repair malfunctioning equipment in lieu of using alternative methods such as 
opening a manual liquid dump valve when the automatic liquid dump valve fails or blind flanging off a pressure 
relief line when a PSE ruptures. 
3.  Lessees and operators should review platform piping to ensure that deck drains have an adequate trap 
mechanism to prevent gases from migrating through them, that deck drains are not piped to a pressure line 
before entering a sump tank, and that piping for produced water does not tie into the piping for the wastewater 
from the living quarters. 
4.  Lessees and operators should review their gas detection system to ensure that the locations of 
gas detector sensing heads provide adequate protection and that all heads are tested. 
5.  Lessees and operators should review flare boom lines to ensure that they are designed of proper length, 
height, and oriented in the proper position according to prevailing winds to minimize the migration of gas back to 
1 of 2 2/21/2012 4:13 PM 

Safety Alert No. 174 - Accumulation of Gas in Living Quarters Result... http://www.gomr.boemre.gov/homepg/offshore/safety/safealt/sa_174... 
the living quarters. 
6.  Lessees and operators should consider equipping manned platforms with some type of emergency position-
indicating radio beacon. 
2 of 2 2/21/2012 4:13 PM