

 
Safety Alert No. 402                               Contact: Jason Mathews       
October 16, 2020                                        Phone: (504) 731-1496 
 
 
 Deficiencies in Process Piping Cause Gas Release Incidents
  
 
                                                              
An increased number of gas release incidents have occurred in the Gulf of Mexico Region 
due to leaks from cracked welds, ring gaskets, flange gaskets, inlet nozzles, pipeline risers, 
suction headers,   pressure safety valves (PSVs), and fuel gas lines.  
 
 
These  gas  release  incidents  involve  deficiencies  in  Quality  Assurance  and  Mechanical  
Integrity (QAMI) programs and are caused by corrosion of process piping and deterioration 
of flanges and gaskets. Below are details on a few recent incidents: 
•    A cracked weld on a compressor suction bottle triggered a gas detector alarm. Prior 
stabilization modifications as well as fatigue caused by the vibrations of the 
machinery over time may have contributed to the failure of the weld. 
•    A ring gasket on a test separator outlet developed a leak during well testing. The 
well test required the separator to operate in High Pressure mode, which had not 
been recently performed. 
•    An operator noticed water and ice forming on a fuel gas line and shut-in the facility 
after hearing gas leaking from the line. The insulation on the line allowed moisture to 
accumulate, which caused external corrosion and eventually caused a pinhole leak.  
 
SAFETY ALERT 
 
 
A leak was found in this 2” vent line during compressor blow down. 

A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations 
that could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
 
Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators and contractors consider the 
following: 
 
•    Ensure the design, installation, inspection, repair, testing, and maintenance of    all 
valves, fittings, flanges, wellhead piping accessories, risers, flowline piping 
accessories, production manifold (headers) piping, pressure vessel piping, and 
pressure relief systems are included within the operator’s QAMI Program;  
•    Verify the QAMI program incorporates all requirements from American Petroleum 
Institute (API) Recommended Practice (RP) 14 E – Design/Installation of Production 
Platform Piping Systems and API 570 – Piping Inspection Code: In-service 
Inspection, Rating, Repair, and Alteration of Piping Systems; 
•    Confirm leak detection methods include primary protection, secondary protection, 
and location of safety device requirements from API 14C - Recommended Practice 
for Analysis, Design, Installation of Basic Surface Safety Systems for Offshore 
Production Platforms (7
th
 Edition, 2001); 
•    Review daily pollution inspection records to ensure all gas releases that initiate 
equipment or process shutdown are reported to BSEE per 30 CFR 250.188(b)(2); 
• Ensure personnel are trained in gas detection practices and reporting 
requirements;   
• Exercise care when pressurizing piping that has been out of service; 
• Verify that pulsation dampeners and other vibration dampening equipment are 
functioning properly and maintained. Bladder type dampeners may need to be 
periodically re-pressurized; 
• Verify that compressors and other equipment that produce vibration are properly 
maintained. Poorly maintained or malfunctioning compressors may produce 
excessive vibration which may damage piping; and, 
• Thoroughly investigate the root causes of leaks to identify potential management 
system deficiencies. 
 
--BSEE-- 