

 
SAFETY ALERT 
Contact: bseepublicaffairs@bsee.gov 
Phone: (800) 200-4853 
  
 
 
 
Improper Use of Hand Tools Poses Injury Risk  
The Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement (BSEE) has observed a trend of 
safety incidents related to improper use of hand tools. This pattern has given rise to 
hand and finger injuries, emphasizing the need for future continuous vigilance and strict 
adherence to safety protocols. BSEE is informing workers and providing 
recommendations to help prevent future injuries.  
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Figure 1: Hand placement      Figure 2: Damaged glove 
Recent incidents include the following: 
• An offshore worker was drilling holes in 2-inch angle iron for pipe supports using 
a handheld drill. The angle iron was held in a vise. The worker was wearing 
leather impact gloves while drilling in and reversing out the drill bit when it caught 
in the glove material. As a result, the worker’s left index finger was caught 
between the handle and the body of the vise, causing a laceration that required 
stitches. The drilling procedures and hazards were not covered in a job safety 
analysis. 
Safety Alert No. 485 
May 1, 2024 

 
 
• An offshore worker was using a hand drill when the thumb of his glove got caught 
in the drill bit (Figure 1 – Hand placement), pulling his thumb into the drill bit. This 
caused a contusion to the employee’s left thumbnail bed (Figure 2 – Damaged 
glove) and a fractured thumb. 
 
Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators and their contractors, where 
appropriate, consider doing the following: 
• Reviewing and discussing this BSEE Safety Alert with offshore employees and 
emphasizing the importance of hand placement to prevent hand injuries, as well 
as the need to remain diligent during routine tasks to identify work hazards. 
• Finding good footing while using hand tools, maintaining balance, and securing 
work with clamps or a vise to free both hands for safe use of power tools. 
• Anticipating the potential for the drill bit to bind, and direction in which the drill 
would spin when using a hand drill.  
• Wearing appropriate personal protective equipment, such as leather gloves, 
safety goggles, or face shields. 
• Inspecting tools prior to use and following manufacturer specifications.  
• Removing from service and tagout any damaged tools.   
• Selecting and using tools that are appropriate for the task. Never using tools for 
purposes other than what the manufacturer intended.    
• Ensuring tools meet all guarding and safety standards. Never bypassing guards 
or using tools with broken or missing guards.    
 
– BSEE – 
 
 
 
A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations that 
could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
 
 
Category: Personnel Safety 