

 
Safety Alert No. 394                            Contact: Stanislaus Kaczmarek       
September 25, 2020                            Phone: (703) 787-1612 
 
 
 Recently Discovered Cybersecurity Vulnerabilities May 
Impact Energy Company Industrial Control Systems
  
 
The Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA) is aware of multiple 
vulnerabilities that could allow a highly skilled, remote attacker to take control of various 
Industrial Control Systems, such as those that open and close valves or control flow rates 
and pressures.  
 
Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators and contractors follow this CISA 
guidance: 
•    Monitor current and future CISA advisories regarding “Treck TCP/IP stack 
vulnerabilities”;    
•    Assess your potential exposures and take required action to mitigate the risks;  
•    Notify your Information Technology teams that these vulnerabilities derive from 
“Treck TCP/IP stack implementations for embedded systems,” which CISA believes 
can impact millions of devices worldwide, including energy sector ICS and a broad 
scope of internet-connected devices;  
•    Ensure your vendors notify you of available patches and remediation strategies; 
•    Review the following products for additional information and mitigations, and update 
to the latest stable version of Treck TCP/IP stack software (6.0.1.67 or later): 
o   CISA’s Advisory ICSA-20-168-01
 
o   CERT Coordination Center’s Vulnerability Note VU#257161 
o   Treck’s Vulnerability Response Information 
•    Minimize network exposure for all control system devices and/or systems and 
ensure they are not accessible from the internet; 
•    Locate control system networks and remote devices behind firewalls and isolate 
them from the business network; 
o   When remote access is required, use secure methods, such as Virtual 
Private Networks (VPNs).  
o   Ensure VPNs are updated to the most current version available as VPN is 
only as secure as the connected devices. 
o   Use an internal DNS server that performs DNS-over-HTTPS for lookups. 
•    Follow your established internal procedures and report your findings to CISA for 
tracking and correlation against other incidents if any suspected malicious activity is 
observed; and, 
SAFETY ALERT 
 
 

A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations 
that could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
 
•    Perform proper impact analysis and risk assessment prior to deploying defensive 
measures. 
 
CISA provides a section for control systems security recommended practices on the ICS 
webpage on us-cert.gov. Several recommended practices are also available for reading 
and download, including Improving Industrial Control Systems Cybersecurity with Defense-
in-Depth Strategies. 
Additional mitigation guidance and recommended practices are publicly available on the 
ICS webpage on us-cert.gov in Technical Information Paper ICS-TIP-12-146-01B--
Targeted Cyber Intrusion Detection and Mitigation Strategies. 
Contact Information at CISA 
Email: CISAservicedesk@cisa.dhs.gov and Central@cisa.gov 
 
Toll Free: 1-888-282-0870 
 
For industrial control systems cybersecurity information: https://www.us-cert.gov/ics  
For incident reporting: https://www.us-cert.gov/report 
  
--BSEE-- 