

   
 
   
 
 
                                                                
Safety Alert No. 400                                Contact: Nicholas Fraiche 
 October 9, 2020                                        Phone: (504) 736-7631                                                   
 
Trapped Pressure Ejects Rod From Chamber and Strikes 
Subsea Technician in   the Face 
 
 
 
 
 
During blow-out preventer equipment pressure testing operations, a subsea technician 
sustained an injury while removing the Hands-Free Goose Neck (HFGN) locking cylinder 
assembly bolts. The technician was performing a work-around procedure when a sheared 
indicator rod ejected
 from the back side of the HFGN cartridge operator, striking the 
technician’s safety glasses and face. The rod then continued to travel past two 
supervisors and landed on the upper moon pool platform. 
An investigation indicated that the choke and kill stab locks would not retract because 
both the indicator rods sheared. The contractor’s maintenance records showed the 
indicator rods sheared several months earlier but were not repaired or replaced. Instead 
of fixing the sheared indicator rods, the subsea team performed a work-around procedure 
to retract the choke and kill stab locks. This work-around did not note the hazard of 
indicator rods loose inside the cartridge operator flange after both sheared from the de-
coupling segments.  
BSEE recommends that operators and contractors consider the following:  
• Maintain equipment in accordance with OEM specifications; 
• Follow proper procedures when performing work orders; 
• Do not use “Out of Service” equipment; 
• Do not create work-around procedures for “Out of Service” equipment; and,  
SAFETY ALERT 
 
 
Sheared Indicator rod ejected from Hands-Free Goose Neck (HFGN) cartridge operator striking a subsea technician’s safety 
glasses. 

   
 
A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations 
that could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf.  
 
• Always be cognizant of potential trapped pressure and note this as a hazard on 
procedures and Job Safety Analysis.     
 
--BSEE-- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  