

 
 
  Figure 2 - Part of casing protruding out of well drive-pipe.                                                                                      
                                                                                                        
Figure 1 - Deformed grating above casing deck.                
   
Fatality Caused by Failure to Use Safety 
Devices with Temporary Test Equipment  
    
 
On May 15, 2021, an incident resulted in the fatality of an offshore worker when two 
production personnel were pressure testing a 16-inch well surface casing and an 
explosion occurred. The explosion entailed a high-pressure release with no signs of 
ignition. 
Information obtained by BSEE during the subsequent investigation determined that 
personnel were using a high-pressure well to supply the pressure to the well casing. 
They installed temporary test equipment that included a high-pressure hose and a 
digital pressure gauge, but they did not use the pressure-regulating device and pressure 
safety valve during the pressure test. 
The personnel first opened the surface safety valve to begin the casing pressure test on 
the 16-inch casing. They then opened the needle valve on the top of the source well 
Safety Alert No. 476 
Nov. 21, 2023 
Contact: bseepublicaffairs@bsee.gov 
Phone: 800.200.4853 
Bureau of  
Safety and  
Environmental 
Enforcement 
SAFETY ALERT 

 
 
and the needle valve on the receiving well’s 16-inch casing. The target test pressure 
was 250 pounds per square inch gauge (psig)
1
. Also, at the time of the test, the 
production personnel were unaware of the pressure rating for the 16-inch casing. As 
they were monitoring the test pressure, the 16-inch well casing exploded, releasing fluid 
through a 1½-inch opening between the 36-inch drive pipe and the wellhead base plate. 
The resulting surface casing failed due to overpressure, fatally injuring the worker.  
The section of grating above the casing deck was disfigured and blown upwards from 
the explosion (Figure 1). Oil residue was observed on handrails, piping, and platform 
structure beams. The force was so powerful that the surrounding area handrails were 
disfigured; a section of the handrail was blown off the platform and never recovered. 
The paint on the surrounding structure beams was blasted down to the bare metal. On 
the casing deck, the force from the explosion created a slight bend upward of the 
wellhead 1-inch-thick base plate (Figure 2). 
BSEE’s investigation identified the following:  
• The production personnel conducted a pressure test using temporary test 
equipment without using a pressure regulator and pressure safety valve, which 
resulted in the overpressure and subsequent explosion of the well’s 16-inch 
casing. 
• The operator failed to develop and/or implement a hazards analysis (facility level) 
and a Job Safety Analysis (operations/task level) for the activities on May 15, 
2021, as required within its Safety and Environmental Management Systems 
(SEMS) manual. 
• The production personnel failed to follow the Pre-job Planning Safe Work 
Practice, as required within its SEMS manual. By neglecting to follow this 
practice, the operator compromised the safety of personnel and deviated from 
the established protocols outlined in the SEMS manual. 
• The ability to switch between output modes on the digital gauge created a 
potential scenario where the production operator could have inadvertently read 
the pressure displayed in units of bars instead of pounds per square inch. 
• The operator neglected to carry out the necessary Management of Change 
(MOC) process before installing and utilizing temporary equipment, as explicitly 
 
1
 PSIG is the term for pressure specified by a gauge or other pressure measurement device. It gives the 
difference between the pressure in a pipe or tank and the pressure of the atmosphere (atm). Gauge 
pressure is measured relative to ambient atmospheric pressure. 

 
 
outlined in its SEMS manual. This failure to adhere to established procedures 
posed a significant risk to personnel safety and operations integrity.  
BSEE therefore, recommends that operators and their contractors consider: 
• Ensuring that the pressure rating for all temporary equipment is verified to be 
compatible to specific application prior to use. 
• Utilizing a pressure regulating device and a pressure safety valve to protect 
against overpressure anytime temporary equipment is utilized where the source 
pressure is greater than any downstream components’ existing pressure rating.   
• Implementing training sessions and raising awareness among personnel to 
enhance their proficiency in utilizing, interpreting, and accurately reading units of 
measurement recorded by all gauges and measurement devices. Proper 
understanding of how measurement devices are used is essential for maintaining 
safety protocols.   
• Ensuring that a hazard analysis is thoroughly evaluated during the development 
of pressure testing procedures. This analysis should consider all potential 
hazards associated with the pressure testing operation. Furthermore, it is 
imperative to include the implementation of all necessary hazard mitigation 
measures.   
• Establishing and documenting comprehensive procedures for assessing the 
potential hazards and risks associated with individual inactive wells. The 
outcome of this assessment should then be utilized to prioritize the abandonment 
process.   
• Ensuring that all operations and contract personnel engaged in any pressure 
testing activities attend and actively participate in a pre-job meeting or toolbox 
talk. It is also essential to document the proceedings of these meetings. 
Furthermore, all operations and contract personnel should review the Job Safety 
Analysis (JSA) and ensure all hazards are acknowledged and policies, 
procedures, guidelines, contingencies, and communications are understood. 
BSEE reminds industry of the following:  
• The need to comply with 30 CFR § 250.867(c), “Temporary equipment 
associated with the production process system, including equipment used for the 
well testing and/or well clean-up, must be approved by the District Manager.” 
Following this regulation will ensure that BSEE has an opportunity to review the 
temporary piping or equipment and help ensure that the temporary piping or 

 
 
equipment complies with API Recommended Practice 14C, as well as all 
applicable production safety system regulations. 
 
• The need to comply with 30 CFR § 250.1914 for safe work practices and 
contractor safety management. Specifically, paragraph (b) states that operators 
are responsible for ensuring and documenting that employees are 
“knowledgeable and experienced in the work practices necessary to perform their 
job in a safe and environmentally sound manner.”   
 
• The need to comply with 30 CFR § Subpart S, 250.1900-1933 – Safety and 
Environmental Management Systems (SEMS). The requirements include, but are 
not limited to, understanding hazards before starting a job, communicating those 
hazards, ensuring personnel are competent to manage the hazards through 
proper mitigation methods, ensuring that equipment is capable of and suitable for 
managing and mitigating hazards, and that all personnel understand the use of 
and need for Stop Work Authority for any reason. 
 
• The need to comply with 30 CFR § 250.1912 – that all individuals follow the 
company’s MOC policy and procedures when it comes to the installation and 
operation of temporary equipment. Furthermore, before initiating any pressure 
testing activities on the facility, workers should take the necessary precautions 
identified during the assessment and management of any changes made to the 
existing procedures or equipment as specified in mentioned policies and 
procedures. 
 
Additional information is included in BSEE Panel Report 2023-004. 
 
A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations 
that could assist in avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
Category: Fatality, Explosion 