

 
SAFETY ALERT 
Contact: bseepublicaffairs@bsee.gov 
Phone: (800) 200-4853 
  
Figure 2. Helideck Rating & Sizing 
Figure 3. Helideck Safety Labeling  
  
 
                                                                      
 
 
Delay in Publication of Derated Helideck Weight Capacity  
Leads to Near Miss Incident 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement (BSEE) has observed a concerning 
trend of safety incidents linked to unsafe helideck conditions and improper adherence to 
established protocols. A recent near-miss incident that occurred during a helicopter flight to an 
offshore facility that had recently downgraded its helideck weight capacity serves as a 
precautionary example and underscores the critical need for effective communication and 
protocol compliance regarding helideck operations and conditions.  
Incident Details:  
During pre-flight mission planning, a helicopter pilot ensured the platform’s helideck could 
support the helicopter’s weight by conducting a thorough review. This included checking the 
facility's helideck information, consulting the Federal Aviation Administration’s (FAA) Notice to 
Airmen (NOTAM) system, and verifying any Temporary Flight Restrictions (TFRs). The pilot 
also confirmed the helideck's published weight rating of 12,000 lbs. with the facility operator 
before departure. No changes to the weight rating were noted during the standard flight 
planning process. 
Upon arrival and prior to landing at the facility,  the pilot observed a freshly painted red-hatched 
area and a new visible weight rating of 6,000 lbs. (Figure 2) After verbally confirming with the 
platform operator over the radio that a helideck downgrade had occurred, the pilot deemed it 
unsafe to land. The pilot informed the flight operations center to revise the flight plan for a safe 
landing at a nearby facility. 
  
 
Safety Alert No. 490 
October 10, 2024 
Figure 1. Offshore Facility 

 
 
This incident highlights the risks associated with delaying the publication of accurate helideck 
conditions. While the pilot’s alertness prevented a potential incident, the event underscores 
significant gaps in communication and documentation procedures.  
 
BSEE recommends that operators and their contractors, where appropriate, consider 
doing the following: 
 
• Ensuring all helideck conditions are accurate, validated, and published, including recent 
updates and/or deratings, through direct communication with facility operators and the 
FAA. 
• Verbally confirming helideck weight ratings and conditions before takeoff and just prior 
to landing, especially for decommissioned or modified structures. 
• Ensuring operational procedures are updated to include verification with facility 
personnel before starting a flight to a facility of any recent helideck deratings. 
• Encouraging crew members to voice concerns and verify information. Effective 
teamwork is essential for safe operations.  
• Anticipating the impacts of any changes to facilities, ensure all notifications, required 
and otherwise, are made and received promptly. 
• Implementing mandatory checks to confirm helideck capacities and conditions regularly. 
• Reinforcing clear communication of helideck status changes to all personnel, ensuring 
updated information is accessible.  
• Conducting regular training sessions focused on recognizing helideck markings and 
their safety implications. 
•    Updating helicopter operation protocols, emphasizing the importance of pre-arrival 
briefings and toolbox meetings. 
• Implementing continuous monitoring of helideck conditions and markings and updating 
operational protocols as needed.  
BSEE emphasizes the importance of adhering to established safety guidelines while fostering 
a culture of vigilance and proactive communication. This incident reaffirms the necessity for 
continuous training, open communication, and rigorous verification processes to mitigate risks 
associated with helideck operations.  
 
Additionally, BSEE reminds industry of the following information and aids to minimize 
risks to passengers, helideck crews, and others involved in offshore helideck 
operations: 
 
•    HSAC RP 163
 Inspection, Maintenance and Operations of Offshore Helidecks.  
•    HSAC RP 165 Air Operator Guidelines for Offshore Helicopter Operations – 1
st
 Edition. 

 
 
•    BSEE Safety Alert No. 322 / Helideck Obstructions and Compounding Procedural Errors     
Contribute to Five Near Misses on OCS. 
• BSEE Safety Alert No.413 / Hazards Identified in Level I Surveys not Communicated to 
Affected Personnel 
• BSEE Safety Alert No. 479 / Lack of Adherence to Helideck Safety Procedures Results 
in Series of Near Miss Incidents for additional information. 
• 30 CFR 250.1912 – Criteria for Safety Management System Management of Change. 
• BSEE Notice to Lessees (NTL), NTL-2021-N03/Helideck Closures and Markings 
• 30 CFR 250.890 – Records. (c) You must submit to the appropriate District Manager a 
contact list for all facilities at least annually or when contact information is revised. The 
contact list must include: (6) Facility helideck rating and size. 
 
– BSEE – 
 
 
 
A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the circumstances 
surrounding a potential safety issue. It   also contains recommendations that could assist avoiding potential 
incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
 
 
Category: Aviation 