

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                      
                            
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
Safety Alert No. 254 Contact: Jason Mathews 
September 26, 2007 (847) 735-0326 
Falling Drill Pipe Causes Fatality 
Recently, contract rig personnel were engaged in the task of laying down 5-1/2 inch drill pipe 
from the rig floor to the rig’s pipe rack. The task involved moving the pipe from the mousehole 
to the V-door by using a nylon strap, of which one end was attached to the pipe by using a single 
chocker cinch; while the other end was attached to the rig floor’s air hoist. As it neared the V-
door, one joint of pipe, weighing approximately 600 pounds, inadvertently released from the 
strap, fatally striking one of the floor hands. 
In an MMS investigation, it was concluded that the causes of the accident, in part, were an 
improperly placed strap cinch, lack of training and inexperience on part of the person responsible 
for cinching the strap, improper supervisory assignment of duties, the designated operator’s 
over-reliance on the contractor’s safety plan, a lack of specific safety responsibilities of the 
designated operator’s representative on the rig, and the contractor’s ineffective safety program 
and HSE department.  
Therefore, the MMS recommends to all lessees and operators the following: 
Lessees and designated operators should review the adequacy of their policies from a safety 
perspective regarding both the selection of contractors and the monitoring of the selected 
contractor’s onsite performance. Policies should include a complete review and approval of the 
contractor’s safety plan prior to the selection of the contractor. 
Lessees and designated operators should communicate to their onsite representatives in writing 
the safety expectations of the operator and the representative’s detailed safety-related 
responsibilities. Those responsibilities should include the monitoring of all aspects of the 
contractor’s onsite performance. Further, the onsite representative should have the authority to 
enforce the designated operator’s safety expectations as communicated to him. 
Lessees and designated operators should insist that all personnel participating in rigging/lifting 
operations on their lease have formal rigger training prior to such participation.  
—MMS—GOMR— 
www.gomr.mms.gov 