

Safety Alert No. 391                               Contact: Roderick Belson 
September 17, 2020          Phone: (504) 736-2745 
Improper Use of Equipment Results in Shock Loaded Crane 
and Damaged Tension Packer 
While performing Plug and Abandonment 
operations, an operator attempted to set a  
7 5/8” Model MAD-1 Tension Packer on a  
2 7/8” tubing work string by using the 
platform crane. After four attempts, the 
emergency release shear ring on the packer 
sheared, which caused the crane to be 
shock loaded. 
BSEE identified the following causes that led 
to, or may have contributed to, the incident: 
1. The crane was used on four separate 
occasions to apply upward tension to the 
packer without changing the shear ring after 
each event. The manufacturer tech sheet 
states, “The shear ring is designed to only 
take a tension load once and it is 
recommended that the shear ring is 
changed out after each run.” 
2. The operator did not know the operating rating or tolerance for the shear ring on the 
packer. 
3. Risk/Hazard Analysis was not thoroughly performed before the job. The Job Safety 
Analysis written prior the incident stated that casing jacks would be used for pulling 
operations; however, a crane was used. 
4. The platform crane was used to lift a tension packer that was not free to be lifted. API 
Recommended Practice 2D, Operations and Maintenance of Offshore Cranes 
(Appendix B.3.2.3) states, “Before starting a lift, the following conditions shall be 
verified: ...2) The load is free to be lifted.” 
SAFETY ALERT 
A Model MAD-1 Tension Packer 

A Safety Alertis a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations 
that could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf.
Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators and contractors consider the 
following: 
· Refer to Original Equipment Manufacturer design specifications when unsure of 
equipment tolerances; 
· Consider using a load cell data recording device when making lifts; 
· Use the dynamic load chart when entering the well bore to mitigate dynamic forces 
applied to a load that a crane operator may have little to no warning to correct; 
· Adhere to Standard Operations Procedures/Safe Work Practices prior to performing 
crane operations; 
· Determine if a load is free prior to initiating crane operations to lift a work string 
during a well abandonment; 
· Refrain from attempting to use a crane to pull/lift a work string or load not free to be 
lifted; and, 
· Always review job specific Job Safety Analysis and Hazard Analysis prior to 
performing work. 
--BSEE-- 