

   
 
   
 
 
Safety Alert No. 414                         Contact: Jason Mathews 
February 24, 2021                                               Phone: (504) 731-1496 
 
 
Ship Allisions Result in Severe Damage to Fixed Facilities   
 
                                         
         
Figure 1: Damage from ship allision in October 2020          Figure 2: Damage from ship allision in January 2021  
 
 
The South Pass area, like many areas of the Gulf of Mexico, is very near a shipping lane 
resulting  in  allisions  and  near  misses.  These  allisions  can  cause  extensive  damage  to  
platforms and structures in the GOM.  
 
 
On October 17, 2020, at approximately 4:45 am, an oil tanker allision occurred with the 
north side of a shelf platform in the South Pass area. There was significant damage done 
to the platform, with extensive structural damage in the contact area (figure 1). There 
were no injuries or pollution associated with this incident.     
 
On January 7, 2021, at approximately 2:00 am, an oil tanker allision into an unmanned 
shelf platform in the South Pass area.  The platform sustained damage to egress routes 
and vent piping (figure 2).  Initial indications were that the major structural members were 
spared damage; however, an underwater inspection will need to be conducted to confirm. 
There were no injuries or pollution associated with this incident. The damaged platform 
SAFETY ALERT 
 
 

   
 
A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations 
that could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
  Category: General, Other 
was prepped for decommissioning. 
 
 
These incidents are both under investigation; however, preliminary evidence suggested 
navigational aids that were accessible by Operators were operating as designed.  
 
 
Therefore, BSEE recommends that Operators consider the following: 
 
• Inspect all navigation aids on all manned and unmanned structures in the Gulf of 
Mexico to ensure proper functionality. 
 
• Consider reviewing the frequency of inspection of navigation aids for structures 
located near to known shipping lanes. 
• Operators should contact the US Coast Guard to complete and submit a Notice to 
Mariners when navigation aids are inoperable.  
 
• For manned structures, consider developing a close ship protocol and conduct 
drills to deter and respond accordingly to an allision. 
 
• At a minimum, Operators should audit their facilities for compliance with the 
following US Coast Guard requirements.  More frequent maintenance and 
inspection may be warranted if the platform location is near a shipping lane. 
o 33 CFR 66 – Private aids to navigation; 
o 33 CFR 67.05 - General requirements for Lights;  
o 33 CFR 67.10 - General requirements for Sound Signals; 
o 33 CFR 143.15(a) - Lights and Warning Devices. 
• Conduct a Level I survey after an allision to assess the severity of damages on the 
topsides portion of the platform resulting from the event. 
 
• Conduct a Level II/III underwater survey after an allision to determine the condition 
of the structural members potentially impacted as a result of the event. 
 
--BSEE-- 
 