

  
 
 
Safety Alert No. 459 
March 8, 2023 
Contact: bseepublicaffairs@bsee.gov 
Phone: (800) 200-4853 
 
Lack of   training with Hydraulic Torque Wrench contributes to fatality 
aboard the drillship 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Floorhand Bolt Removal Figure 2. Riser Bolt and Telescopic Riser Joint 
 
 
During well operations, a    fatality occurred on a drillship in the Gulf of Mexico. 
 
While unlatching the lower Marine Riser Package from the Blowout Preventor in 
preparation for ship relocation, a crewmember was lifted into the air after being struck 
by a Hydraulic Torque Wrench (HTW), hitting a riser clamp approximately six feet 
above the elevated work deck before falling to the rig floor. The crewmember was given 
first aid and transported to the drillship’s hospital, where he was later pronounced 
deceased. 
 
The incident investigation found that the rig crew was using a HTW  to extract the bolts 
from a telescopic riser joint (TJ) flange. During the operation, the HTW socket became 
stuck between the bolt head and the tapered edge of the TJ. After failing to manually 
dislodge the HTW using physical exertion, the rig crew utilized a Hydraulic Utility Winch 
(HUW) to supply upward force and applied tension to free the HTW. 
 
SAFETY ALERT 

A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It   also contains recommendations that 
could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
After applying the upward force, the HTW became unstuck under tension and shot 
upwards leading to the crewmember being struck. 
 
Additional information is included in the BSEE Panel Investigation Report. 
 
 
 
Contributing Factors included the following: 
 
• Lack of recognizing the stuck-HTW potential on the TJ beveled edge. 
• Lack of comprehensive understanding of the Task Risk Assessments associated 
with the riser pull. 
• Failure to effectively communicate all learnings from the previous riser pulls. 
• Lack of formalized training for the utilization of the HTW and HUW. 
• Adverse designs of the HTW and the HUW. 
• Contributing Causes: 
o Failure to initiate Stop Work Authority. 
o Discrepancies with the Drill Floor Observer roles and responsibilities. 
 
Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators and contractors consider the 
following: 
 
• Ensure the Job Safety Analysis captures the limitations of the HTW when in use. 
• Verify all employees understand the Job Safety Analysis and have been formally 
trained on operating both the HTW and HUW. 
• Emphasize the initiation of Stop Work Authority if an imminent danger is 
observed. 
• Expand the Drill Floor Observer's responsibilities to monitor all aspects of 
jobs occurring on the rig floor. 
• Consider utilizing a HTW with a compatible design that corresponds with the 
beveled edge of the TJ. 
• Explore options for employing a load indicator or a similar design mechanism 
onto the HUW package. 
• Ensure pre-job reviews, and promote the sharing of feedback from 
previous experiences. 
 
 
– BSEE – 
 
 
 
Category: Personnel Safety/Process Safety 