

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MMS 
 Gulf of Mexico OCS Region
 
 
 
 
U.S. Department of the Interior 
Minerals Management Service 
 Safety 
Alert 
Safety Alert No. 275 Contact:  Glynn T. Breaux 
28 January 2009 (504) 736-2560 
Wellhead Damage Caused by Hurricane 
Subsequent to Hurricane Ike, several wells on a platform were leaking from the flanged wellhead 
connections. Several attempts were made to isolate wellhead pressure through utilization of Surface 
Controlled Subsurface Safety Valves (SCSSVs), but an uncontrolled gas leak from one well resulted 
when the well’s SCSSV would not fully close to isolate the wellhead from downhole pressures. The well 
was flared several hours before the SCSSV fully closed to seal and isolate the wellhead. Wellhead repairs 
were made the following day with no report of personnel injury or environmental pollution.  
A Minerals Management Service (MMS) investigation into this incident revealed that the root cause of 
the wellhead damage resulted from the large hurricane forces acting on the wellhead flange studs, 
resulting in the loss of seal integrity. These forces were also evident from several flowline u-bolts and 
caisson stabilizers that also failed/broke during the hurricane. The stabilizers are support gussets that 
attach the well’s caisson to the bell guide, and are used to minimize movement of the caissons relative to 
the platform structure. The failed stabilizers and u-bolts could have allowed the hurricane forces to impart 
enough moment force to the wellhead studs to stretch them to fatigue.  
Operators are reminded that a Level I survey should be conducted after direct exposure to a significant 
environmental event (e.g., hurricane) in accordance with subsection 14.3.1 of API RP 2A-WSD (Refer to 
NTL No. 2005-G20 and NTL No. 2008-G18 for additional information regarding this requirement). 
Subsequent to severe weather events, collisions, etc., MMS recommends that operators visually inspect 
wellhead studs, flowline u-bolts, and caisson stabilizers prior to returning the wells to flow.  If the 
inspections indicate that the wellhead studs, flowline u-bolts, and/or stabilizers may have been subjected 
to forces greater than design limitations, the following action is recommended to prevent possible loss of 
well control: 
•   Verify zero pressure on the SCSSV control line. 
•   Isolate the SCSSV control line from the wellhead. 
•   Isolate wellbore pressure from the damaged equipment. 
•   Repair/replace all damaged equipment. 
•   Test the wellhead to the maximum anticipated surface pressure prior to opening the SCSSV. 
--MMS--GOMR--
www.gomr.mms.gov 