

Contact: bseepublicaffairs@bsee.gov 
Phone: (800) 200-4853 
  
  
 
 
 
 
Unsafe Working Practices Result in Crane Injury 
 
In May 2022, a lead mechanic suffered a severe leg injury while performing a boom tip 
changeout on an offshore pedestal crane. The injured person (IP) and his assistant 
deviated from the planned scope of work, failed to rig up the mid-section to the bridle 
(Figure 1) prior to removing the mid-section to boom tip connector pins (Figure 2), and 
failed to use boom connector safety pins (Figure 3). After removing the bottom right pin, 
both employees assumed the bottom left pin would be difficult to remove since it was 
bearing the weight of the boom section. When the IP struck the remaining connector 
pin, it unexpectedly ejected, causing the boom to drop and pinning the IP’s leg against a 
sledgehammer and grating (Figure 4), and fracturing the IP’s tibia.  
 
Facility personnel used a pallet jack, a piece of two-inch pipe, and a two-by-four piece of 
wood to lift the boom tip and pull the IP from under the boom tip. They then applied a 
tourniquet to the IP to help stop the bleeding from the compound fracture. 
  
 
Safety Alert No. 446 
July 20, 2022  
SAFETY ALERT 
 
 
Figure 1 – Example of how mid-section 
should have been rigged 
 
Figure 3 – Boom connector safety pin 
Figure 2 – Boom connector pin 
Figure 4 – Boom section on injured 
person’s (IP) leg 

The response of the facility personnel was critical in providing the IP lifesaving 
interventions until treatment could be provided at the hospital on shore. 
 
The company’s incident investigation found that the root causes were: 
A. The Job Safety Analysis (JSA) was only completed by one employee and did not 
include rigging up the mid-section to the bridle prior to removing pins or the use 
of safety boom connector pins. In addition, the IP signed off on the JSA without 
reviewing it.  
 
B. There was no requirement for onshore management or the crew to review the 
JSA before commencing work. 
 
Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators and contractors consider the 
following: 
 
• Reviewing their Safety and Environmental Management System (SEMS) policies 
and procedures and ensuring compliance with the JSA requirements. 
• Reinforcing the use of Stop Work Authority (SWA) when the scope of work 
changes. 
• Ensuring that employees understand the importance of staying out of the line of 
fire when working near heavy equipment and consider all pinch points when 
walking down the job. 
• Verifying all safety equipment is available and in place prior to the job start. 
• Providing specific written procedures to individuals disassembling cranes. 
• Re-emphasizing that all individuals involved in a task should thoroughly review the 
JSA to verify all potential hazards have been addressed, including immediately 
before the job begins (e.g., during a toolbox talk). 
• Ensuring specialized contractors create and maintain written procedures and 
checklists for common jobs that can be referenced during the JSA/hazard 
analysis process. 
• Conducting drills based on realistic injury and first-aid scenarios and inspect 
medical supplies and kits at the facility level. 
• Reviewing BSEE’s District Investigation (once complete) at 
https://www.bsee.gov/what-we-do/incident-investigations/offshore-incident-
investigations/district-investigation-reports. 
 

– BSEE –  
 
 
 
 
A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations that 
could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
 
 
Category: Cranes, Personnel Safety 