

 
Safety Alert No. 380                               Contact: Jason Mathews 
March 31, 2020                                       Phone: (504) 731-1496 
 
 
 Subsea Jumper Failure Leads to Leak
  
 
                                                              
In  October  2017,  a  subsea  leak  that  went  undetected  for  over  24  hours  resulted  in  an 
estimated  16,000  barrels  of  oil  released into  the  Gulf  of  Mexico.  BSEE  investigated  the  
incident to determine the causes and prevent future occurrences.  
 
 
A BSEE investigation panel recently concluded that the leak resulted from a failed jumper 
that connected the wellhead to the Pipeline End Termination (PLET). This failure resulted 
from internal corrosion within the jumper and movement of the PLET and pipeline, which 
added mechanical stress to the jumper.  
The panel also found that while a Pressure Safety Low was installed, it was set below 
hydrostatic pressure for the flowline operated in this range; therefore, the operator did not 
have any sensors that would trigger an alarm due to a suspected leak. Lack of training 
was also cited because the operator relied on the Control Room Operators’ experience 
and they were not trained to shut in wells for unexplained pressure fluctuations or 
metering discrepancies.  
  
SAFETY ALERT 
 
 
Crack downstream of a multi-phase flow meter flange 

A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations 
that could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
 
Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators and contractors consider the following: 
 
•    Review BSEE Panel Report 2019-002
; 
• Incorporate subsea leak detection into the Safety and Environmental Management 
System (SEMS) with increased focus on training, mechanical integrity, operating 
procedures, and pre-startup review;  
• Provide training to Control Room Operators to increase awareness of the 
possibility of flowline integrity loss to a higher consideration when undergoing 
startup operations;  
• Consider improving subsea leak detection methods by employing conditional rate 
of change, mass in mass out, or other advanced monitoring technologies;  
• Evaluate and enhance pressure trend analysis for leak detection where possible; 
• Assess designs of applicable components for their tolerance under increased loads 
due to thermal expansion or other movement; 
• Review the use and placement of sleepers or other components that mitigate 
pipeline buckling; 
• Evaluate the construction of flowline components to ensure that materials have 
adequate corrosion mitigation properties; 
• Consider the use of different surveying methods such as Light Detection and 
Ranging (LIDAR) to confirm that pipeline systems remain within their design 
tolerances throughout their service life; and, 
• As an industry, consider revising API Recommended Practice 17V
 to include 
subsea leak detection. 
 
--BSEE-- 