

 
SAFETY ALERT 
Contact: bseepublicaffairs@bsee.gov 
Phone: (800) 200-4853 
  
Figure 1: ROV Dropping into Water Due to Umbilical Failure During Recovery. 
  
 
 
 
Umbilical Termination Failure Leads to Dropped 
Remotely Operated Vehicle (ROV) 
 
 
Incident Overview: An incident occurred at   a Gulf of America facility involving a 
remotely operated vehicle (ROV) that resulted in the ROV dropping into the water and 
descending to the seafloor (Figure 1). The ROV operator had completed an inspection 
dive of the drilling riser and Blow Out Preventor (BOP) and was in the process of 
recovering the unit from the water.  
After the ROV was nested in the Launch and Recovery System (LARS)  cursor, the unit 
cleared the surface and traveled the vessel cursor rails up to the cursor transition point. 
At the transition point, the operator stopped hauling in the umbilical winch and cursor 
assist tuggers to switch the umbilical winch to low-tension mode.  
As the ROV reached the cursor rail transition point, the umbilical parted, causing the 
ROV to drop to the seafloor. The ROV was subsequently located and recovered using 
its transponder. No damage to any seabed assets or harm to personnel occurred. 
Cause: The incident was traced back to a flaw in the initial umbilical attachment. A resin 
was used to secure the umbilical to the ROV, but the resin case was faulty, and the 
armored strands were improperly centered and distributed during the attachment 
process (Figure 2). Despite passing a previous pull test, the defects led to the failure.  
 
 
  
 
Safety Alert No. 499 
April 4, 2025 

 
 
Figure 2: Inverted Resin Fill Cone and Armor Strands. 
Actual Failed Termination of the ROV Umbilical and Example of Correct Strand Centering Distribution. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Resin Cast Examples. 

 
 
Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators and their contractors, where 
appropriate, do the following: 
 
• Develop and implement an umbilical termination inspection procedure and 
training program to ensure proper inspection of resin condition and the 
assessment of armored strand separation. The program should also include 
training on re-termination of umbilicals. 
• Incorporate umbilical inspections into pre-job checks and maintenance 
procedures to ensure the integrity of the connection is verified prior to use. 
 
 
– BSEE – 
 
 
A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations that 
could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
 
 
Category: Dropped Object 