

Contact: bseepublicaffairs@bsee.gov 
Phone: (800) 200-4853 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
    Galley and Living Quarter Fires 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Recently reported galley and living quarter fires have highlighted maintenance concerns 
within grills, stoves, ovens, dryers, power connections, and electrical wiring. According to 
Operator’s reports: 
 
• A cook noticed an unusual smell and saw a small flame coming from a crack in the 
steam table. The cook extinguished the flame with water and notified the 
supervisor. The supervisor noticed a small amount of black smoke coming out of a 
crack on the steam table and immediately unplugged it. The cabinet doors were 
opened, and no flame was seen. The electricians removed the electrical panel 
access cover and found the terminal block smoldered (see photos above). 
•    A kitchen worker was prepping a gas chargrill for a meal. While trying to light the 
grill with the electrical ignitor, the worker witnessed an electric arc coming from 
the hinge bracket on the grill. The worker shut off power to the grill and notified 
the control room. Further investigation found that the hinge bracket had broken 
and was pinching the ignitor wire causing it to arc and to be cut in half.  
  
 
Safety Alert No. 431 
March 1, 2022 
SAFETY ALERT 
 
 
The crack on the surface of the steam table may have allowed 
steam to enter the enclosure and short out the electronics 
inside, causing a fire.
 

• A general alarm was sounded due to smoke in the laundry room. Smoke appeared 
to be coming from the dryers. The clothes were removed from the dryers and found 
to be extremely hot. A full muster occurred. The dryers were taken out of service 
and upon further inspection, it was discovered that the heating cycle was not 
working correctly causing the dryer to over-heat.    
• A member of the catering/steward staff discovered smoke coming from a dryer in 
the laundry room. The individual immediately notified the chief steward. The two 
returned to the laundry room to discover small flames in a dryer drum. The chief 
steward immediately notified the captain, who sounded the alarm and dispatched 
the fire team. 
• Galley personnel were in the process of removing a drip pan, located below the 
galley griddle, when liquid from the drip pan splashed on the lower controls of the 
unit.  This shorted out the controls and tripped the galley breaker.  No flames were 
observed, but slight charring was noted on the electrical wiring behind the panel. 
• Sparks and smoke were observed from a receptacle in a stateroom.  A hand-held 
chemical extinguisher was used on the receptacle, and the incident was reported to 
the bridge. The breaker was opened and locked out. It was discovered that the 16 
amp circuit could not withstand the prolonged use of 12.8 amp portable space 
heaters. 
•    A galley fire resulted in a crew muster. The source of the fire was hand towels 
which were folded up inside a stainless-steel cabinet with no electrical or chemical 
source in the cabinet. The fire was extinguished with a dry chem extinguisher. The 
fire may have been caused by drying laundry with oily residues. 
 
Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators consider:  
 
• Developing a galley equipment annual service review. The review should include 
electrical connections, ground fault analysis, hidden wires and components that 
aren’t often visually inspected, as well as OEM recommended maintenance. 
• Ensuring that the electrical components of galley equipment are not exposed to 
liquids, steam, or food scraps. Check enclosures for damage. 
• Unplugging galley equipment during maintenance and certain cleaning operations. 
• Ensuring grease collection associated with galley cooking equipment is working 
properly, drained regularly, and kept free of debris. 
• Increasing inspections of galley electrical equipment, ovens, and ranges, with 
additional focus on electrical switches, panels, receptacles, and connections. 
•    Removing from service any galley equipment with electrical concerns or defects. 
•    Inspecting fire extinguishers monthly and service them annually. Refer to 33 CFR 
145 for fire extinguisher type, location, and quantity requirements. 
 
− 
BSEE − 
 
 
 
A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a    potential safety issue. It   also contains recommendations that 
could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
 
 
Category: Fire, Personnel Safety  