

Contact: bseepublicaffairs@bsee.gov 
Phone: (800) 200-4853 
  
  
 
 
Safety Alert No. 450 
September 7, 2022 
 
Unsafe Chemical Use and Disposal 
 
Several recent events involving the improper use or disposal of chemicals have been 
reported to BSEE. 
 
Incident 1:  During the disposal of expired paint products, a worker mixed epoxy resin 
and solidifier in a container. In a second container, Carboline epoxy paint A & B 
components were mixed. Finally, the two containers were mixed into a five-gallon 
bucket and placed in a paint locker. Five minutes later, the worker noticed smoke 
coming from the locker. The worker placed the bucket into a larger container filled with 
water and left. Twenty minutes later, the worker’s supervisor noticed white smoke 
coming from the container and called the control room. The platform was shut down and 
personnel mustered. The worker added more water to the container enroute to his 
muster station, but the smoking did not stop until later when the mixture was covered 
with fire retardant powder.  
  
 
SAFETY ALERT 
 
 
Incident 2: The cloth caught on fire when it was 
heated by direct sunlight 
Incident 1: The chemical reaction created heat and 
smoke that charred the bucket and container.  

Incident 2: An operator noticed a cotton cloth rag smoldering inside a wheelbarrow. 
The wheelbarrow also contained filtration media and used paint that was curing before 
disposal. Water was used to put out the fire. The investigation determined that the cloth 
likely contained flammable Carboline thinner, which ignited as the cloth dried in direct 
sunlight. 
 
Incident 3:  An employee attempted to clear a clogged drain in the living quarters with 
Liquid Fire drain cleaner (active ingredient: sulfuric acid). The employee then added 
additional drain cleaner on the mornings of the next two days without success. At 19:30 
on the third day, the employee added chlorine bleach to attempt to unclog the drain. 
The bleach and drain cleaner reacted causing a small greenish yellow gas cloud to 
form. The employee inhaled a small amount of the gas and experienced a sudden 
shortness of breath. The employee was medivacked to a hospital for chest x-rays, 
supplemental oxygen, and breathing treatment and was later released. 
 
Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators consider:  
 
• Mixing a smaller volume of chemicals first to verify that the mixture will not be 
hazardous and not leaving the mixture unattended until it has cooled. When epoxy 
base is mixed with solidifier, the reaction may be exothermic (i.e., produce heat). 
 
• Avoiding leaving cloths, rags, mops, or clothing that have been saturated with 
flammable liquids in hot areas or direct sunlight. Laundering these items without first 
removing the flammable liquids can cause fires. 
 
• Not mixing cleaning products. Follow the instructions provided by the manufacturer 
and do not use them for purposes other than their designated use. 
 
• Reading the Safety Data Sheets (SDS) and developing procedures for handling 
chemicals that account for their specific hazards. Keep SDS on file for all chemicals 
kept in inventory or used routinely at your facility. SDS include information about 
hazardous chemical properties, personal protective equipment (PPE) requirements, 
and procedures for first aid, handling, cleanup, firefighting, storage, and disposal. 
 
• Verifying that firefighting and spill response equipment is nearby and ready for use 
before starting a job. Some firefighting formulations may not be effective against 
certain chemicals, and water may worsen some types of fires or chemical reactions. 
 
• Wearing proper PPE when handling chemicals. Face shields, special chemical 
handling gloves, and aprons are common PPE for chemical handling. Latex gloves 
may be sufficient for some chemicals; others may require PVC or nitrile gloves. Refer 
to the SDS for PPE information. 
 

• Using turn-key service contracts that include disposal of unused chemicals and paints 
by experienced personnel. 
 
• Establishing an inventory management system that covers the full life cycle of 
chemicals kept in inventory at your facilities. Improperly stored or expired chemicals 
may create additional hazards or complicate disposal. 
 
   
– BSEE – 
 
 
 
 
 
Category: Fire, Chemical Exposure, PPE  
A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations that 
could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
 
 