

SAFETYALERT 
Safety Alert No. 418                                      Contact:  bseepublicaffairs@bsee.gov 
   April 22, 2021  Phone: (800) 200-4853 
Inadequate Job Planning and Change Management 
Leads to Injury 
Figure 1: Location where handrail injury occurred 
On Feb. 12, 2021, a crew was removing a heater tube from a heat exchanger. 
Before removing the heater tube, a job safety analysis (JSA) was performed to 
ensure crew members understood the sequence of planned steps and associated 
hazards involved in the task. After work began, the crew determined that removing 
a handrail was necessary to create enough space to access the heater tube 
successfully. Crew members were aware that removing the handrail was not part of 
the original job scope; but began removing the handrail anyway without revising the 
JSA or conducting a toolbox discussion of the additional work requirements and 
potential hazards. 
To free the last leg of the handrail from its socket, a crane equipped with a nylon 
sling attachment was used to apply upward tension while the crew used a 5-foot 
prybar leveraged underneath the kickplate. When the handrail suddenly broke free, 
the force of tension caused it to strike a crew member, knocking him to the ground 
and fracturing his nose and orbital socket. The crew member was transported to 
shore for medical evaluation, where doctors determined that surgery was required. 

The company’s incident investigation process determined the causal factors of this 
incident to be: 
1. Inadequate work planning - the job steps did not cover the entire 
process to successfully remove the heater tube from the heat exchanger. 
The JSA should have been revised to include the job steps from the 
additional work that was added, including control measures to safely 
identify and mitigate all hazards involved with the task of removing the 
handrail. 
2. Inadequate training - three of the five crew members were found to be 
deficient in their formal “company-specific” JSA training. 
3. Noncompliance with company policies - none of the employees 
involved followed company policy to stop the job when the crew deviated 
from the tasks identified in the original JSA. 
    
Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators consider the following: 
1. Assess, develop, and implement Leadership/Supervisory training and 
evaluation programs with periodic refresher training to ensure 
commitment and understanding of company SEMS policies and 
expectations. 
2. Assess, develop, and implement in-house JSA and Stop Work Authority 
training and evaluation programs with periodic refresher training specific 
to company SEMS policies and expectations. 
3. Ensure personnel discuss additional duties and hazards that come up 
with a change in work assignment. Use Stop Work Authority if hazards 
are not identified, or equipment is not adequate for the job. 
– BSEE – 

2 
Categories: Safe Work Practices 
Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the circumstances 
surrounding an accident or near miss. It also contains recommendations that should help prevent the 
recurrence of such an incident on the Outer Continental Shelf. 