

U.S. Department of the Interior
Minerals Management Service
Gulf of Mexico OCS Region
Safety Alert No. 227
March 8, 2005
Contact:Glenn Woltman
(504) 736-2438
Explosion and Fire on Platform Caused by Improper Welding and Burning Practice
Recently, scheduled maintenance work was performed on process equipment on an offshore
production platform.  The scope of the repair work for this pressure vessel includedthe use of a
“cold-cut” saw to remove manageable pieces of a segment of bad piping extending from near the
process system.  When the “cold-cut” saw blade became dull before commencing the lastcut, a
decision was made to use a cutting torch to make the final piping cut.  This procedure had not been
addressed in the Job Safety Analysis (JSA), and no provisions had been made for the hot work to
include the installation of a fire blanket over the vessel, or to render the contentsof the vessel inert.
Shortly thereafter, an explosion was heard and a small fire ensued.
MMS concluded that an air/hydrocarbon fuel mixture inside the vessel was ignited by sparks from the
cutting torch, as a result of a small hydrocarbon vapor leak from around one of the vessel’s hatch cover
gaskets.  MMS further concluded that the causes of the accident in part are the operator’s failure to
follow his Welding and Burning Safe Practices Plan and the regulatory requirements regarding hot work
procedures.
The MMS recommends the following:
·Supervisors must provide adequate job preparation, instructions, and job planning prior
to undertaking work.  Hazards must be identified as work proceeds, and action plans
taken to change the JSA as the job steps change.
·Crewsmust follow approvedWelding and Burning Safe Practices Plans.
·Immovable equipment should be protected with flame-proofed covers, shielded with
metal or fire-resistant guards or curtains, or have its flammable substances rendered
inert.
  —MMS—GOMR—
www.gomr.mms.gov
Visit our Safety Information Website
Explosion and Fire on Platform Caused by Improper Welding and Bur...http://www.gomr.boemre.gov/homepg/offshore/safety/safealt/SA_227...
1 of 12/21/2012 4:44 PM