

 
Safety Alert No. 369                             Contact: Jason Mathews 
October 25, 2019                         Phone:    (504) 731-1496 
 
 
Non-OEM Parts Were Significant Causal Factors in Two 
Recent Loss of Control of Traveling Block Incidents
  
 
   
Driller’s side drum brake band assembly at the time of the September 11, 2019 incident. 
                                                                 
  
On September 11, 2019, a drill crew was lowering a 7.625” casing joint.  The driller was 
unable to apply enough brake power necessary to stop the full descent of the top drive.  
The Operator’s incident investigation revealed that the set pin of the drum brake 
assembly broke/snapped off allowing the roll pin to back out of the brake assembly which 
prevented the drum-break from being engaged.  This failure caused the top drive and 
casing joint to slowly lower into the joint located in the slips.  The top drive descended 
until the traveling block rested on the casing stabbing board due to lost brake tension.  
The offside brake stayed engaged and slowed the descent, which helped prevent harm to 
personnel and limited damage to equipment. 
On July 20, 2017, in a separate incident, an operator reported a dropped object incident 
while conducting drilling operations.  The incident involved drill line that unspooled and 
SAFETY ALERT 
 
 
Backed out drum 
brake assembly 
set roll pin 
  
 
Main brake pin 
no longer 
secured by 
retainer pin 

A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations 
that could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
 
detached from the drawworks drum, causing the traveling block and approximately 123 
feet of drill line to descend to the rig floor.  The investigation report indicated improperly 
sized drill line drum clamp and clamp bolts were installed on the drawworks drum.   
 
View of traveling block and 
unspooled cable drill line on rig 
floor following the July 20, 2017 
incident.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Incident investigations for both of the above events revealed incorrect, non-original 
equipment manufacturer parts were significant causal factors. 
Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators consider the following: 
 
• Inspect drawworks systems to ensure that original equipment manufacturer (OEM) 
parts are installed correctly;  
• Inspect the drum brake and cable retention systems as part of the six-month and 
5-year periodic inspections; 
• Conduct maintenance according to frequencies recommended by the manufacturer 
and by API RP 8B;  
• Identify additional equipment where retaining pins should be inspected for 
deficiencies;  
• Consider reviewing and verifying all dimensions and material properties of critical 
components; and 
• Consider reviewing the use of non-OEM parts as a Management of Change (MOC) 
process. 
 
--BSEE-- 