

Contact: bseepublicaffairs@bsee.gov 
Phone: (800) 200-4853 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
Hazards Associated with Cranes on Idle Facilities 
Pose Safety and Environmental Risks 
   
 
 
 
BSEE inspectors have observed multiple crane components in poor condition on idle 
facilities throughout the Gulf of Mexico. Additionally, BSEE inspectors have noted 
various crane components missing that were previously attached by crane cables. 
 
After extended periods of inactivity, with little or no operator inspection and 
maintenance, lifting equipment deteriorates due to harsh offshore environmental 
conditions. BSEE inspectors have observed corrosion on numerous crane cables, which 
support main blocks, auxiliary balls, overhaul/headache hook balls, and anti-two block 
equipment. Without proper oversight, the weakened cables have parted, resulting in 
cables and associated crane components dropping from elevation. In addition, 
diminished integrity of wire rope and synthetic slings exposed to weather elements have 
also been identified as dropped object hazards. These slings are sometimes used to 
support heavy water hoses and diesel fuel hoses. If the slings fail, there is a potential for 
severe consequences. The dropped objects can potentially pose a safety risk to 
personnel boarding the facility or individuals nearby the facility, such as offshore support 
vessel crewmembers or commercial/recreational fishermen. The dropped objects can 
also become marine debris, posing environmental risks. 
 
  
 
SAFETY ALERT 
 
 
Safety Alert No. 448 
August 10, 2022 
Figure 1 – Corroded crane cable 
 
Figure 2 – Crane missing main block and auxiliary ball 

Along with dropped object hazards, potential pollution threats associated with inactive 
cranes on idle facilities have been identified by BSEE inspectors. Defective fittings, 
hoses, and leaking diesel/hydraulic reservoirs have been observed across multiple idle 
platforms.    
 
As most inactive cranes on idle structures have been taken permanently out of service 
(OOS), they no longer require an annual inspection by a qualified inspector. 
Consequently, in most cases preventative or corrective maintenance has been 
disregarded.  
 
Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators, contractors, and crane owners 
consider:  
 
• Removing all blocks and balls from inactive cranes on idle facilities. If immediate 
removal is not possible, temporarily secure the blocks/balls with straps or slings that 
are in adequate condition to prevent dropped objects hazards. 
  
• Conducting a full-function operation inspection when an OOS crane is being put back 
into service, paying special attention to the lubrication of the wire ropes. All slings on 
idle facilities that are kept on outboard brackets should be appropriately stored or 
discarded to eliminate the possibility of falling overboard. 
  
• Clearing diesel and hydraulic reservoirs and associated hoses on cranes that have 
been permanently taken OOS to eliminate pollution potential. 
 
• Notifying the appropriate district office of any missing or damaged crane components. 
 
 
 
 
– BSEE – 
 
 
 
 
 
A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations that 
could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
 
 Category: Cranes/Lifting  