

Contact: bseepublicaffairs@bsee.gov 
Phone: (800) 200-4853 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
Breakdowns in Communication and Preparation Lead 
to Failure of Synthetic Slings  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In May 2021, an incident occurred when a contract crane operator and two contract 
mechanics demobilized the facility’s gantry crane in preparation for the arrival of a platform 
rig package.  
 
After holding a morning safety meeting, the crew proceeded to prepare for the 
demobilization. To remove the gantry by use of a rental crane, the lift required the 
application of two synthetic (i.e., polyester) slings on the rental crane auxiliary line in 
combination with a two-part wire rope sling on the rental crane main line. The two polyester 
slings were tied to the bottom section of the gantry to assist with the orientation of the load. 
When attempting to lift and rotate a section of the gantry, one of the polyester slings failed, 
which caused the weight to shift to the remaining polyester sling. As a result of this 
additional weight, the secondary polyester sling subsequently failed (Figure 1). With the 
slings compromised, the load fell approximately six feet to the deck, striking a handrail and 
a portion of the facility’s cable tray containing electrical wiring (Figure 2). There were no 
injuries associated with this event. 
 
Multiple incident findings were identified through the operator’s formal investigation:  
  
 
Safety Alert No. 435 
March 31, 2022  
SAFETY ALERT 
 
 
Figure  2. Gantry  Contacting  and  Damaging the 
Cable Tray and Bending the Main Deck Handrail  
 
Figure 1. One of the Two Frayed / Parted Synthetic 
Slings from the Incident 
 

• There was no safe lifting plan created for the non-routine lift.  
• Management failed to make available operational procedures to the crew for the 
disassembly of the gantry crane.   
• The Job Safety Analysis (JSA) completed for the operation was a pre-completed 
template version that did not contain details for safely rotating the load. 
• Despite personnel anticipating the weight of the load to be 9,000 pounds, the actual 
reading was more than 15,000 pounds once the load was set on the main block. The 
initial calculations failed to consider additional crane components, such as the winch, 
ladder, and ropes. 
• Personnel improperly rigged the slings using a choker configuration. This sling 
arrangement did not have the capacity to safely lift the original 9,000-pound 
anticipated weight. 
• The crane operator failed to initiate Stop Work Authority (SWA) when observing the 
increased recorded weight on the load cell in conjunction with the slings being utilized 
for the lift. The crane operator was hesitant to question the expertise of the lead 
mechanic. 
 
Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators and contractors consider the following: 
 
• Developing and following specific safe lifting plans based on the scope of crane 
operations (e.g., heavy lifts, blind lifts, etc.). 
• Ensuring applicable personnel have access to the necessary operating 
procedures and understand them prior to performing work. 
• Confirming all communication is established and agreed upon between 
applicable personnel prior to commencing tasks. 
• Reviewing JSAs for high-risk operations and verifying they include job-specific 
instructions and associated mitigations for potential hazards. 
• Incorporating an additional verification measure for confirming the accuracy of 
load weight calculations prior to commencing operations. Reviewing calculations 
when discussing operational procedures could help to verify the information. 
• Ensuring slings are rigged in the most advantageous configuration to secure the 
load through the entirety of the lift. 
• Initiating SWA and reassessing the job scope if any activity is observed to be 
unsafe or unforeseen, despite positional ranking, years of experience, or 
seniority level. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations that could 
assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
 
 
Category: Crane / Lifting  