

 
SAFETY ALERT 
Contact: bseepublicaffairs@bsee.gov 
Phone: (800) 200-4853 
  
  
 
 
 
BSEE Investigation: Failure to Properly Identify and Restrict Access 
to Faulty Grating Poses Serious Risk of Worker Injury or Fatality 
 
 
The Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement (BSEE) recently investigated an 
incident at a Gulf production facility that could potentially have resulted in a worker 
injury or fatality. During a facility walkthrough, operator personnel had identified grating 
near a skid as a hazard due to corrosion and installed hard barricades to prevent 
access. However, shortly thereafter, operator personnel installed two scaffolding boards 
on top of the previously identified grating hazard and removed the hard barricades so 
work could proceed (Figure 1). A worker tasked with installing a pump in the skid above 
the unsafe grating was kneeling on the scaffolding boards with the tip of his boots 
resting on the grating when the corroded section of grating suddenly gave way (Figure 
2). The worker was able to quickly react, grabbing hold of a nearby section of piping to 
support himself. Upon further inspection, the worker later realized the 36 by 36-inch 
piece of grating beneath the scaffolding boards he was kneeling on had collapsed and 
fallen into the water. 
Following the incident, operator personnel placed additional boards over the resulting 
open hole in the grating but did not install hard barricades or identify the area as a 
hazard.  
Hard barricades were later reinstalled, and the grating was subsequently replaced. 
 
  
 
Safety Alert No. 496 
March 6, 2025 
Figure 1: Faulty grating covered in scaffold 
boards (right). 
Figure 2: Operator’s body position at time of 
incident. 

 
 
BSEE recommends that operators and their contractors, where appropriate, do 
the following: 
• Review BSEE Notice to Lessees No. 2024-N03 Restricting Access to Unsafe 
Areas Due to Corrosion NOTE: Lessees and Operators are required to comply 
with 30 CFR 250.107, What must I do to protect health, safety, property, and the 
environment by  “maintaining all equipment and work areas in a safe condition.” 
30 CFR 250.107(a)(2). 
• Review in conjunction with this Safety Alert, BSEE Safety Alert 416 - 
Investigation into Grating Failure Fatality Reveals Deficiencies, and BSEE Safety 
Alert 365 - BSEE Identified Grating and Open Hole Hazards During Risk Based 
Inspections.  
• Conduct a thorough walkthrough of the facility to identify open holes and check 
that potentially unsafe surfaces can safely support the weight of individuals 
working on or around them. If such an area or open hole is identified, ensure it 
has been properly barricaded and/or covered. 
• Review internal and contractor Safe Work Practices to ensure that operations 
personnel clearly understand the requirements and expectations for the use of 
barricades. Effective hard barricades should be rigid, immovable structures that 
create a barrier to restrict access to hazardous or unsafe areas.  
• Review and adhere to 30 CFR 250.1909 (h): Ensure that management of safety 
hazards and environmental impacts is an integral part of the design, construction, 
maintenance, operation, and monitoring of each facility. 
• Review and adhere to 30 CFR 250.1914 (f): You must inform your contractors of 
any known hazards at the facility they are working on, including but not limited to 
fires, explosions, slips, trips, falls, other injuries, and hazards associated with 
lifting operations. 
– BSEE – 
 
 
A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the 
circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations that 
could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
 
 
Category: General; Grating/Open Holes 