

Safety Alert No. 518 
Date: July 1, 2026 
Contact: bseepublicaffairs@bsee.gov 
Phone: (800) 200-4853  
 
Figure 1: Damaged Lease Automatic Custody Transfer charge  
pump, electric motor and coupling. 
 
 
 
 
 
Mechanical Failure of LACT Pump Caused Fire 
Verify Pump Alignment After Motor Replacement to Prevent Fires 
 
 
 
 
Incident: 
The Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement recently investigated a fire at an 
offshore production facility in the Gulf of America. The fire occurred after motor-to-pump 
misalignment on a Lease Automatic Custody Transfer, or LACT, charge pump caused the 
pump to fail mechanically (Figure 1). 
The misalignment loosened the pump casing fasteners and allowed oil to leak onto the skid. 
Platform personnel extinguished the fire using handheld fire extinguishers and a fire hose. No 
injuries were reported. The incident damaged the pump, electric motor and coupling. Most of 
the oil remained in containment; however, an estimated 0.001 gallons of oil was released into 
the Gulf of America.  
  

Findings: 
The electric motor had been replaced recently and had been in operation for 10 days at the 
time of the incident. Facility personnel did not observe abnormal conditions during daily 
rounds before the incident.  
The investigation found that proper installation procedures were not followed when the 
electric motor and coupling were installed. A straightedge was used to align the motor 
horizontally and vertically, but angular alignment was not performed. The coupling bolts 
were not installed to the proper torque, the motor was installed without shims, and the 
motor mounting bolts were not torqued to proper specifications.  
Disassembly and inspection of the motor confirmed the following sequence of failure: 
During normal operations, the motor operated at approximately 3,600 rpm. The motor-to-
pump coupling misalignment, combined with the high operating speed, caused excessive 
vibration. The vibration loosened the pump casing fasteners, which allowed oil to leak from 
the pump casing. The coupling eventually failed, causing additional damage to the pump 
and the electric motor. These failures and the associated leak led to ignition of oil on the 
skid. 
Therefore, BSEE recommends that operators and their contractors, where appropriate, 
do the following: 
• Install equipment according to original equipment manufacturer specifications and 
approved maintenance procedures.  
• Ensure that proper installation procedures and all required tools are available before 
work begins. 
• Ensure that all personnel are properly trained on installation procedures, proper tool 
use, and post-installation function checks for equipment prior to performing work. 
• Evaluate maintenance procedures to determine if post-installation surveillance of 
equipment needs improvement, such as increased frequency of operator rounds 
and/or multiple-day monitoring of equipment. 
• Investigate vibration alarms, equipment faults, and other signs of abnormal 
operation. Vibration alarms may be triggered by nearby equipment if that equipment 
is mechanically connected or coupled.  
 
-BSEE- 
 
 

A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of 
the circumstances surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains 
recommendations that could assist avoiding potential incidents on the Outer 
Continental Shelf.
 
 
 
 
 
Category:  Fire, Equipment Installation 