

 
 
Contact: bseepublicaffairs@bsee.gov 
Phone: 800.200.4853 
  
 
  
 
  
 
Scam Alert: Suspicious Requests for Payment 
 
The Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement (BSEE) is issuing this Safety 
Alert to inform users about possible scams requesting payment of fines for violations. 
 
Be aware the documents you receive may appear to be printed on official government 
letterhead and could be used to justify requests for payments or loans. 
 
BSEE does require payment of fines for certain violations, but BSEE will never: 
 
• Request payment via phone or through any social media platforms. 
• Require a payment from an individual to exit an offshore facility. 
• Request any payment using a gift card. 
• Demand any payment without prior notification. 
• Send letters containing spelling, grammar, and punctuation errors. 
 
Should BSEE require a payment for a civil penalty or a fine, the fine will be paid by the 
operator, not by an individual. BSEE will always send an initial notice to the operator 
and provide them the opportunity to engage with the BSEE Civil Penalty team.  
 
Fines are paid through the Federal Reserve’s Fedwire Funds Service. 
https://www.federalreserve.gov/paymentsystems/fedfunds_about.htm 
 
Any fees resulting from an appeal of a civil penalty fine is paid through the pay.gov 
website https://www.pay.gov/public/home. 
 
For more information on government impersonation scams, please see, How To Avoid a 
Government Impersonation Scam document from the Federal Trade Commission at  
https://consumer.ftc.gov/articles/how-avoid-government-impersonation-scam 
 
More information about BSEE’s civil penalty process can be found on the Bureau of 
Safety and Environmental Enforcement website. 
https://www.bsee.gov/what-we-do/safety-enforcement/civil-penalties-program 
 
 
 
  
 
Safety Alert No. 483 
April 15, 2024 
SAFETY ALERT 

 
 
If you receive a suspicious request to pay a fine that appears to be from BSEE, please 
contact the BSEE Office of Public Affairs at 1-800-200-4853 or 
bseepublicaffairs@bsee.gov  
 
– BSEE – 
 
 
A Safety Alert is a tool used by BSEE to inform the offshore oil and gas industry of the circumstances 
surrounding a potential safety issue. It also contains recommendations that could assist avoiding potential 
incidents on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
 
 
Category: Scams  