

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MMS 
U.S. Department of the Interior 
Minerals Management Service 
 Gulf of Mexico OCS Region
 Safety 
Alert 
Safety Alert No. 274 	Contact:  Glynn T. Breaux 
(504) 736 2560 8 December 2008 	
Wireline BOP and Lubricator Ejection into GOM  
Recently, a Wireline (W/L) Blowout Preventer (BOP) and Lubricator were ejected from the wellhead into 
the Gulf of Mexico (GOM) during an attempt to retrieve a W/L DX plug from the production tubing. The 
accident resulted in severe facial injuries to the W/L Operator.  
A Minerals Management Service (MMS) investigation into this accident revealed that its root cause was 
two fold: (1) Failure to comply with 30 CFR 250.618(c), which requires testing the lubricator prior to 
running-in-the-hole, and (2) Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) were not followed when pressure was 
not applied above the W/L DX plug in order to equalize the tubing above the plug with pressure from 
below the plug prior to attempting to pull the plug out of the wellbore. Additional investigatory findings 
include the following: 
•	 Failure to follow the MMS approved Application for Permit to Modify (APM) by not beginning 
each day/tower meeting with a Job Safety Analysis (JSA) for the task at hand.  
•	 The standard W/L tool used for pulling the DX plug out of the wellbore did not function to 
equalize the pressure across the plug as a result of a modified DX plug being set in the wellbore. 
The modified DX plug required a W/L pulling tool with a longer equalizing prong to safely 
perform the plug pulling operation. Failure to review and analyze previous well histories, W/L 
tickets, etc., resulted in utilization of the incorrect plug pulling tool. 
•	 Failure to exercise Stop Work Authority (SWA) procedures allowed critical warning signs 
leading up to the accident to be overlooked. Prior to the job, requests from the W/L Operator to 
the Third Party Company Representative were denied for a W/L Helper to assist the W/L 
Operator, in addition to acquiring a pump to test the W/L Lubricator and pressure the production 
tubing above the DX plug prior to attempting to pull the plug. 
•	 Management of Change (MOC) procedures were not implemented when the operation deviated 
from the APM when lines/Lubricator were not tested, SOP were not followed when pressure to 
the production tubing was not applied above the DX plug prior to attempting to pull the plug, and 
when the W/L Operator was unable to equalize the DX plug secondary to utilizing the wrong 
equalizing/pulling tool.  
•	 No pump or other means of testing the lines/Lubricator or pressuring up to equalize the tubing 
was available on the location. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
Therefore, the MMS recommends the following: 
•	 All applicable personnel involved with well intervention activities review and adhere to approved 
applications. 
•	 Proper methods are utilized to equalize down hole W/L plugs prior to pulling the plug.  
•	 A complete review and analysis of historical well file data, W/L tickets, etc., should be conducted 
prior to commencing W/L activities. 
•	 Lessees should remind all workers of the Lessee’s philosophy and policies with respect to SWA 
and MOC. Company SWA and MOC policies and procedures should be exercised by all parties 
involved in the task at hand.  
•	 Lessees are reminded that site-specific pre-job planning (JSAs, safety meetings, etc.) and open 
communications are critical elements for the successful outcome of all job tasks. 
•	 Lessees should consider having a pump on location for testing lines/Lubricator and pressuring up 
to equalize the tubing prior to pulling the plug when other means of testing/pressuring are not 
available or other means are available but not utilized. 
--MMS--GOMR--
www.gomr.mms.gov 